I come no more to make youlaugh:
things now, that bear aweighty
and a serious brow,
Sad, high, and working,full of state and woe,
Such noble scenes as drawthe eye to flow,
We now present.
Those that can pity, heremay,
if they think it well, letfall a tear;
The subject willdeserve it.
Such as give their moneyout of hope
they may believe,
May here find truth too.Those that come to see
Only a show or two, and soagree the play may pass,
if they be still andwilling,
I'll undertake may seeaway
their shilling richly intwo short hours.
Only they that come tohear a merry bawdy play,
A noise of targets,
or to see a fellow
in a long motley coatguarded with yellow,
Will be deceived;
for, gentle hearers, know,
To rank our chosen truthwith such a show
As fool and fight is,
beside forfeiting our ownbrains,
and the opinion that webring,
to make that only true wenow intend,
will leave us never anunderstanding friend.
Therefore, for goodness'sake,
and as you are known thefirst
and happiest hearers ofthe town,
Be sad, as we would makeye:
think ye see the verypersons of our noble story
As they were living;
think you see them great,
And follow'd with thegeneral throng
and sweat of thousandfriends; then in a moment,
see how soon thismightiness meets misery:
And, if you can be merrythen, I'll say
A man may weep upon hiswedding-day.
Good morrow, and well met.
How have ye done sincelast we saw in France?
I thank your grace,
Healthful; and ever sincea fresh admirer
of what I saw there.
An untimely ague stay'd mea prisoner in my chamber
when those suns of glory,those two lights of men,
Met in the vale of Andren.
'Twixt Guynes and Arde:
I was then present, sawthem salute on horseback;
Beheld them, when theylighted,
how they clung in theirembracement,
as they grew together;
Which had they, what fourthroned ones
could have weigh'd such acompounded one?
All the whole time I wasmy chamber's prisoner.
Then you lost the view ofearthly glory:
men might say,
Till this time pomp wassingle,
but now married to oneabove itself.
Each following day becamethe next day's master,
till the last made formerwonders its.
To-day the French,
All clinquant, all ingold, like heathen gods,
Shone down the English;and, to-morrow,
they made Britain India:
every man that stoodshow'd like a mine.
Their dwarfish pages wereas cherubins, all guilt:
The two kings, equal inlustre,
were now best, now worst,
As presence did presentthem; him in eye,
Still him in praise: and,being present both
'Twas said they saw butone;
and no discerner durst waghis tongue in censure.
When these suns-- for sothey phrase 'em--
by their heralds challengedthe noble spirits to arms,
they did perform beyondthought's compass
O, you go far.
As I belong to worship andaffect in honour honesty,
the tract of every thing
would by a good discourserlose some life,
Which action's self wastongue to.
All was royal;
to the disposing of itnought rebell'd.
Order gave each thingview;
the office did distinctlyhis full function.
Who did guide,
I mean, who set the bodyand the limbs
Of this great sporttogether, as you guess?
One, certes, that promisesno element
in such a business.
I pray you, who, my lord?
All this was order'd bythe good discretion
Of the right reverendCardinal of York.
The devil speed him!
no man's pie is freed fromhis ambitious finger.
What had he to do in thesefierce vanities?
I wonder that such a keechcan with his very bulk
Take up the rays o' thebeneficial sun
and keep it from theearth.
Surely, sir,
There's in him stuff thatputs him to these ends;
For, being not propp'd byancestry,
whose grace chalkssuccessors their way,
nor call'd upon for highfeats done to the crown;
neither allied for eminentassistants;
but, spider-like,
Out of his self-drawingweb, he gives us note,
The force of his own meritmakes his way
A gift that heaven givesfor him,
which buys a place next tothe king.
I cannot tell what heavenhath given him,
--let some graver eyepierce into that;
but I can see his pride peepthrough each part of him:
whence has he that, if notfrom hell?
the devil is a niggard,
Or has given all before,
and he begins a new hellin himself.
Why the devil,
Upon this French goingout, took he upon him,
Without the privity o' theking,
to appoint who shouldattend on him?
He makes up the file ofall the gentry;
for the most part such towhom
as great a charge aslittle honour
He meant to lay upon:
I do know Kinsmen of mine,three at the least,
that have by this sosickened their estates,
that never they shallabound as formerly.
O, many have broke theirbacks
with laying manors on 'em
For this great journey.
Grievingly I think, the peacebetween the French and us
not values the cost thatdid conclude it.
Every man, after the hideousstorm that follow'd,
was a thing inspired; and,not consulting,
broke into a generalprophecy;
That this tempest,
Dashing the garment ofthis peace,
aboded the sudden breachon't.
Which is budded out;
For France hath flaw'd theleague,
and hath attach'd ourmerchants' goods at Bourdeaux.
Is it therefore theambassador is silenced?
Marry, is't.
A proper title of apeace;
and purchased at asuperfluous rate!
Why, all this business ourreverend cardinal carried.
Like it your grace,
The state takes notice ofthe private difference
Betwixt you and thecardinal.
I advise you-- And take itfrom a heart
that wishes towards youhonour and plenteous safety
--that you read thecardinal's malice
and his potency together;to consider further
that what his highhatred would effect
wants not a minister inhis power.
You know his nature, thathe's revengeful,
and I know his sword hatha sharp edge:
it's long and, 't may besaid, it reaches far,
and where 'twill not extend,thither he darts it.
Bosom up my counsel,you'll find it wholesome.
Lo, where comes that rockthat I advise your shunning.
The Duke of Buckingham'ssurveyor, ha?
Where's his examination?
Here, so please you.
Is he in person ready?
Ay, please your grace.
Well, we shall then knowmore;
and Buckingham shalllessen this big look.
This butcher's cur isvenom-mouth'd,
and I have not the powerto muzzle him;
therefore best not wakehim in his slumber.
A beggar's book outworthsa noble's blood.
What, are you chafed?
Ask God for temperance;
that's the appliance onlywhich your disease requires.
I read in's looks matteragainst me;
and his eye reviled me, ashis abject object:
at this instant he boresme with some trick:
he's gone to the king; I'llfollow and outstare him.
Stay, my lord,
And let your reason withyour choler question
What 'tis you go about:
to climb steep hillsrequires slow pace at first:
anger is like a full-hothorse,
who being allow'd his way,
Self-mettle tires him.
Not a man in England canadvise me like you:
be to yourself as youwould to your friend.
I'll to the king; and froma mouth of honour
quite cry down this Ipswichfellow's insolence;
or proclaim there'sdifference in no persons.
Be advised;
Heat not a furnace foryour foe
so hot that it do singeyourself:
we may outrun, by violentswiftness,
that which we run at,
And lose by over-running.
Be advised: I say again,
there is no English soulmore stronger
to direct you thanyourself,
If with the sap of reasonyou would quench,
Or but allay, the fire ofpassion.
Sir, I am thankful to you;
and I'll go along by yourprescription:
but this top-proud fellow,
whom from the flow of gallI name not
but from sincere motions,by intelligence,
And proofs as clear asfounts in July
when we see each grain ofgravel,
I do know to be corruptand treasonous.
Say not 'treasonous.'
To the king I'll say't;
and make my vouch asstrong as shore of rock.
Attend. This holy fox, orwolf, or both,
--for he is equal ravenousas he is subtle,
and as prone to mischiefas able to perform't;
his mind and placeinfecting one another,
yea, reciprocally--
Only to show his pomp
as well in France as hereat home,
suggests the king ourmaster
to this last costlytreaty,
the interview, thatswallow'd so much treasure,
and like a glass did breaki' the rinsing.
Faith, and so it did.
Pray, give me favour, sir.
This cunning cardinal
The articles o' thecombination drew
as himself pleased;
and they were ratified ashe cried 'Thus let be':
to as much end as give acrutch to the dead:
Now this follows,-- which,as I take it,
is a kind of puppy to theold dam, treason,
--Charles the emperor,
under pretence to see thequeen his aunt--
For 'twas indeed hiscolour,
but he came to whisperWolsey,
--here makes visitation:
His fears were,
that the interview betwixtEngland and France might,
through their amity, breedhim some prejudice;
for from this league peep'dharms that menaced him:
he privily deals with ourcardinal; and, as I trow,--
Which I do well;
for I am sure the emperorpaid ere he promised;
whereby his suit wasgranted ere it was ask'd;
but when the way was made,and paved with gold,
the emperor thus desired,
that he would please toalter the king's course,
And break the foresaidpeace.
Let the king know,
As soon he shall by me,
that thus the cardinal doesbuy and sell his honour
as he pleases, and for hisown advantage.
I am sorry to hear this ofhim;
and could wish he weresomething mistaken in't.
No, not a syllable:
I do pronounce him in thatvery shape
he shall appear in proof.
Your office, sergeant;execute it.
Sir, my lord the Duke ofBuckingham,
and Earl of Hereford,Stafford, and Northampton,
I arrest thee of hightreason,
in the name of our mostsovereign king.
Lo, you, my lord,
The net has fall'n uponme!
I shall perish underdevice and practise.
I am sorry to see youta'en from liberty,
to look on the businesspresent:
'tis his highness'pleasure
You shall to the Tower.
It will help me nothing toplead mine innocence;
for that dye is on me
which makes my whitestpart black.
The will of heaven be donein this and all things!
I obey.
O my LordAbergavenny, fare you well!
Nay, he must bear youcompany.
The king is pleased youshall to the Tower,
till you know how hedetermines further.
As the duke said, the willof heaven be done,
and the king's pleasure byme obey'd!
Here is a warrant from theking
to attach Lord Montacute;
and the bodies of theduke's confessor,
John de la Car,
One Gilbert Peck, hischancellor--
So, so; These are thelimbs o' the plot:
no more, I hope.
A monk o' the Chartreux.
O, Nicholas Hopkins?
He.
My surveyor is false;
the o'er-great cardinalhath show'd him gold;
my life is spann'dalready:
I am the shadow of poorBuckingham,
Whose figure even thisinstant cloud puts on,
by darkening my clear sun.
My lord, farewell.
My life itself, and thebest heart of it,
Thanks you for this greatcare:
I stood i' the level of afull-charged confederacy,
and give thanks to youthat choked it.
Let be call'd before us thatgentleman of Buckingham's;
in person I'll hear himhis confessions justify;
And point by point thetreasons
of his master he shallagain relate.
'Room for the Queen!'
Nay, we must longer kneel:I am a suitor.
Arise, and take place byus:
half your suit never nameto us;
you have half our power:the other moiety,
ere you ask, is given;
Repeat your will andtake it.
Thank your majesty.
That you would loveyourself,
and in that love notunconsider'd
leave your honour,
nor the dignity of youroffice,
is the point of mypetition.
Lady mine, proceed.
I am solicited, not by afew,
And those of truecondition,
that your subjects are ingreat grievance:
there have been commissionssent down among 'em,
which hath flaw'd the heartof all their loyalties:
wherein, although, my goodlord cardinal,
they vent reproaches mostbitterly on you,
as putter on of theseexactions,
yet the king our master
-- whose honour heavenshield from soil!
--even he escapes notlanguage unmannerly,
yea, such which breaks thesides of loyalty,
and almost appears in loudrebellion.
Not almost appears,
It doth appear; for, uponthese taxations,
The clothiers all,
not able to maintain themany to them longing,
have put off thespinsters,
carders, fullers, weavers,who,
Unfit for other life,
compell'd by hunger andlack of other means,
in desperate manner daringthe event to the teeth,
are all in uproar, anddanger serves among then!
Taxation! Wherein? andwhat taxation?
My lord cardinal,
You that are blamed for italike with us,
know you of this taxation?
Please you, sir,
I know but of a singlepart,
in aught pertains to thestate;
and front but in that file
where others tell stepswith me.
No, my lord, You know nomore than others;
but you frame things thatare known alike;
which are not wholesome
to those which would notknow them,
and yet must perforce betheir acquaintance.
These exactions, whereof mysovereign would have note,
they are most pestilent tothe bearing;
and, to bear 'em, the backis sacrifice to the load.
They say they are devisedby you;
or else you suffer toohard an exclamation.
Still exaction! The natureof it?
in what kind, let's know,Is this exaction?
I am much too venturous intempting of your patience;
but am bolden'd under yourpromised pardon.
The subjects' grief comesthrough commissions,
which compel from each thesixth part of his substance,
to be levied withoutdelay;
and the pretence for thisis named,
your wars in France:
this makes bold mouths:
tongues spit their dutiesout,
and cold hearts freezeallegiance in them;
their curses now livewhere their prayers did:
and it's come to pass,
this tractable obedienceis a slave
to each incensed will.
I would your highness
would give it quickconsideration,
for there is no primerbusiness.
By my life, this isagainst our pleasure.
And for me, I have nofurther gone in this
than by a single voice;
and that not pass'd me
but by learned approbationof the judges.
If I am Traduced byignorant tongues,
which neither know myfaculties nor person,
yet will be the chroniclesof my doing,
let me say 'tis but thefate of place,
and the rough brake thatvirtue must go through.
We must not stint ournecessary actions,
in the fear to copemalicious censurers;
which ever, as ravenousfishes,
do a vessel follow that isnew-trimm'd,
but benefit no furtherthan vainly longing.
What we oft do best, bysick interpreters,
once weak ones, is Notours,
or not allow'd;
what worst, as oft,hitting a grosser quality,
is cried up for our bestact.
If we shall stand still,
In fear our motion will bemock'd or carp'd at,
We should take root herewhere we sit,
or sit state-statues only.
Things done well, and witha care,
exempt themselves fromfear;
Things done withoutexample,
in their issue are to befear'd.
Have you a precedent ofthis commission?
I believe, not any.
We must not rend oursubjects from our laws,
And stick them in ourwill.
Sixth part of each? Atrembling contribution!
Why, we take from everytree lop, bark,
and part o' the timber;
And, though we leave itwith a root, thus hack'd,
The air will drink thesap.
To every county where thisis question'd
send our letters, withfree pardon
to each man that hasdenied the force
of this commission:
pray, look to't; I put itto your care.
A word with you.
Let there be letters writto every shire,
Of the king's grace andpardon.
The grieved commons hardlyconceive of me;
let it be noised thatthrough our intercession
this revokement and pardoncomes:
I shall anon advise youfurther in the proceeding.
I am sorry that the Dukeof Buckingham
is run in yourdispleasure.
It grieves many:
The gentleman is learn'd,and a most rare speaker;
To nature none more bound;
his training such, that hemay furnish
and instruct greatteachers,
And never seek for aid outof himself.
Yet see, when these sonoble benefits
shall prove not welldisposed,
the mind growing oncecorrupt,
They turn to viciousforms,
ten times more ugly thanever they were fair.
This man so complete,
who was enroll'd 'mongstwonders,
and when we, almost withravish'd listening,
could not find his hour ofspeech a minute;
he, my lady, hath intomonstrous habits
put the graces that oncewere his,
and is become as black asif besmear'd in hell.
Sit by us; you shallhear--
This was his gentleman intrust--
of him things to strikehonour sad.
Bid him recount thefore-recited practises;
whereof we cannot feel toolittle, hear too much.
Stand forth, and with boldspirit relate
what you, most like acareful subject,
have collected out of theDuke of Buckingham.
Speak freely.
First, it was usual withhim,
every day it would infecthis speech,
that if the king shouldwithout issue die,
he'll carry it so to makethe sceptre his:
these very words I'veheard him utter
to his son-in-law,Lord Abergavenny;
to whom by oath he menacedrevenge upon the cardinal.
Please your highness,
note this dangerousconception in this point.
Not friended by by hiswish,
to your high person hiswill is most malignant;
and it stretches beyondyou, to your friends.
My learn'd lord cardinal,deliver all with charity.
Speak on:
How grounded he his titleto the crown,
upon our fail?
to this point hast thouheard him
at any time speak aught?
He was brought to this
by a vain prophecy ofNicholas Henton.
What was that Henton?
Sir, a Chartreux friar,His confessor,
who fed him every minutewith words of sovereignty.
How know'st thou this?
Not long before yourhighness sped to France,
The duke being at theRose,
within the parish SaintLawrence Poultney,
did of me demand what wasthe speech
among the Londoners concerningthe French journey:
I replied, men fear'd theFrench
would prove perfidious tothe king's danger.
Presently the duke said,'twas the fear, indeed;
and that he doubted'twould prove
the verity of certainwords
Spoke by a holy monk;'that oft,' says he,
'Hath sent to me, wishingme to permit
John de la Car, mychaplain,
a choice hour to hear fromhim a matter of some moment:
Whom after under theconfession's seal
He solemnly had sworn,
that what he spoke my chaplainto no creature living,
but to me, should utter,
with demure confidencethis pausingly ensued:
neither the king nor'sheirs,
Tell you the duke, shallprosper:
bid him strive to gain thelove o' the commonalty:
the duke shall governEngland.'
If I know you well,
You were the duke'ssurveyor,
and lost your office on thecomplaint o' the tenants:
take good heed you
charge not in your spleena noble person
And spoil your noblersoul:
I say, take heed; Yes,heartily beseech you.
Let him on.
Go forward.
On my soul, I'll speak buttruth.
I told my lord the duke,
by the devil's illusionsthe monk might be deceived;
and that 'twas dangerousfor him
to ruminate on this sofar,
until it forged him somedesign,
which, being believed,
It was much like to do: heanswer'd, 'Tush,
It can do me no damage;'
adding further,
That, had the king in hislast sickness fail'd,
The cardinal's and SirThomas Lovell's heads
should have gone off.
Ha! what, so rank? Ah ha!
There's mischief in thisman: canst thou say further?
I can, my liege.
Proceed.
Being at Greenwich,
after your highness hadreproved the duke
about Sir WilliamBlomer,--
I remember of such a time:being my sworn servant,
The duke retain'd him his.But on; what hence?
'If,' quoth he, 'I forthis had been committed,
As, to the Tower, Ithought,
I would have play'd thepart my father meant to act
upon the usurper Richard;
who, being at Salisbury,
made suit to come in'spresence;
which if granted, as hemade semblance of his duty,
would have put his knifeto him.'
A giant traitor!
Now, madam, may hishighness live in freedom,
and this man out ofprison?
God mend all!
There's something more wouldout of thee; what say'st?
After 'the duke hisfather,' with 'the knife,'
He stretch'd him, and, withone hand on his dagger,
Another spread on'sbreast,
mounting his eyes he diddischarge a horrible oath;
whose tenor was,--were heevil used,
he would outgo his father
by as much as aperformance
Does an irresolutepurpose.
There's his period,
To sheathe his knife inus.
He is attach'd;
Call him to present trial:
if he may find mercy inthe law, 'tis his:
if none, let himnot seek 't of us:
by day and night,
He's traitor to the height.
Is't possible the spellsof France
should juggle men intosuch strange mysteries?
New customs, though theybe never so ridiculous,
Nay, let 'em be unmanly,yet are follow'd.
Death! my lord, theirclothes are after
such a pagan cut too,
That, sure, they've wornout Christendom.
How now! What news, SirThomas Lovell?
Faith, my lord, I hear ofnone,
but the new proclamation that'sclapp'd
upon the court-gate.
What is't for?
The reformation of ourtravell'd gallants,
That fill the court withquarrels, talk, and tailors.
I'm glad 'tis there:
now I would pray ourmonsieurs
to think an Englishcourtier may be wise,
And never see the Louvre.
They must either, for sorun the conditions,
leave those remnants offool and feather
that they got in France,
Or pack to their oldplayfellows:
there, I take it, theymay, 'cum privilegio,'
wear away the lag end of theirlewdness
and be laugh'd at.
'Tis time to give 'emphysic,
their diseases are grownso catching.
What a loss our ladies willhave of these trim vanities!
Ay, marry, There will bewoe indeed, lords:
the sly whoresons have gota speeding trick
to lay down ladies;
A French song and a fiddlehas no fellow.
The devil fiddle 'em! I amglad they are going,
For, sure, there's noconverting of 'em:
now an honest countrylord, as I am,
beaten a long time out ofplay,
may bring his plainsong andhave an hour of hearing;
and, by'r lady, heldcurrent music too.
Well said, Lord Sands;
Your colt's tooth is notcast yet.
No, my lord; Nor shallnot, while I have a stump.
Sir Thomas, whither wereyou a-going?
To the cardinal's: Yourlordship is a guest too.
O, 'tis true: This nighthe makes a supper,
and a great one, to manylords and ladies;
there will be the beautyof this kingdom,
I'll assure you.
That churchman bears abounteous mind indeed,
A hand as fruitful as theland that feeds us;
his dews fall every where.
No doubt he's noble;
He had a black mouth thatsaid other of him.
He may, my lord; haswherewithal:
in him sparing would show aworse sin than ill doctrine:
Men of his way should bemost liberal;
They are set here forexamples.
True, they are so: But fewnow give so great ones.
My barge stays; Yourlordship shall along.
Come, good Sir Thomas, Weshall be late else;
which I would not be, forI was sent for,
with Sir Henry Guildford thisnight to be comptrollers.
I am your lordship's.
Ladies, a general welcome fromhis grace salutes ye all;
this night he dedicates tofair content and you:
none here, he hopes,
In all this noble bevy,
has brought with her one careabroad;
he would have all as merryas, first,
good company, good wine,good welcome,
can make good people.
O, my lord, you're tardy:
The very thought of thisfair company
clapp'd wings to me.
You are young, Sir HarryGuildford.
Sir Thomas Lovell,
had the cardinal but halfmy lay thoughts in him,
some of these should finda running banquet
ere they rested,
I think would betterplease 'em:
by my life, they are asweet society of fair ones.
O, that your lordship werebut now confessor
to one or two of these!
I would I were they shouldfind easy penance.
Faith, how easy?
As easy as a down-bedwould afford it.
Sweet ladies, will itplease you sit?
Sir Harry, Place you thatside;
I'll take the charge ofthis:
His grace is entering.Nay, you must not freeze;
Two women placed togethermakes cold weather:
My Lord Sands, you are onewill keep 'em waking;
Pray, sit between theseladies.
By my faith, I thank yourlordship.
By your leave, sweetladies:
If I chance to talk alittle wild, forgive me;
I had it from my father.
Was he mad, sir?
O, very mad, exceedingmad, in love too:
But he would bite none;just as I do now,
He would kiss you twentywith a breath.
You're welcome, my fairguests:
that noble lady, orgentleman,
that is not freely merry,is not my friend: this,
to confirm my welcome; andto you all, good health.
Your grace is noble:
Let me have such a bowlmay hold my thanks,
And save me so muchtalking.
My Lord Sands,
I am beholding to you:cheer your neighbours.
Ladies, you are not merry:
gentlemen, whose fault isthis?
The red wine first mustrise
in their fair cheeks, mylord;
then we shall have 'emtalk us to silence.
You are a merry gamester,my Lord Sands.
Yes, if I make my play.
Here's to your ladyship:and pledge it, madam,
For 'tis to such athing,--
You cannot show me.
I told your grace theywould talk anon.
(boom)
What's that?
Look out there, some ofye.
What warlike voice, and towhat end is this?
Nay, ladies, fear not;
by all the laws of waryou're privileged.
How now! what is't?
A noble troop ofstrangers;
For so they seem:
they've left their bargeand landed;
And hither make,
as great ambassadors fromforeign princes.
Good lord chamberlain, Go,give 'em welcome;
you can speak the Frenchtongue;
And, pray, receive 'emnobly,
and conduct 'em into ourpresence,
where this heaven ofbeauty
shall shine at full uponthem.
Some attend him.
You have now a brokenbanquet; but we'll mend it.
A good digestion to youall:
and once more I shower
a welcome on ye; welcomeall.
A noble company! what aretheir pleasures?
Because they speak noEnglish,
thus they pray'd to tellyour grace,
that, having heard by fame
of this so noble and sofair assembly
This night to meet here,
they could do no less
out of the great respectthey bear to beauty,
But leave their flocks;and,
under your fair conduct,
Crave leave to view theseladies
and entreat an hour ofrevels with 'em.
Say, lord chamberlain,
they have done my poorhouse grace;
for which I pay 'em athousand thanks,
and pray 'em take theirpleasures.
The fairest hand I evertouch'd! O beauty,
till now I never knewthee!
My lord!
Your grace?
Pray, tell 'em thus muchfrom me:
There should be one amongst'em, by his person,
More worthy this placethan myself; to whom,
If I but knew him, with mylove and duty
I would surrender it.
I will, my lord.
What say they?
Such a one, they allconfess,
There is indeed;
which they would have yourgrace find out,
and he will take it.
Let me see, then.
By all your good leaves,gentlemen;
here I'll make my royalchoice.
Ye have found him,cardinal:
You hold a fair assembly;you do well, lord:
You are a churchman, or,I'll tell you, cardinal,
I should judge nowunhappily.
I am glad your grace isgrown so pleasant.
My lord chamberlain,Prithee, come hither:
what fair lady's that?
An't please your grace, SirThomas Bullen's daughter,
the Viscount Rochford,
one of her highness'women.
By heaven, she is a daintyone.
Sweetheart, I wereunmannerly, to take you out,
And not to kiss you.
A health, gentlemen! Letit go round.
Sir Thomas Lovell, is thebanquet ready
I' the privy chamber?
Yes, my lord.
Your grace, I fear, withdancing is a little heated.
I fear, too much.
There's fresher air, mylord, in the next chamber.
Lead in your ladies, everyone:
sweet partner, I must notyet forsake you:
let's be merry: Good mylord cardinal,
I have half a dozenhealths
To drink to these fairladies,
and a measure to lead 'emonce again;
and then let's dream who'sbest in favour.
Let the music knock it.
(music plays)
Whither away so fast?
O, God save ye!
Even to the hall, to hearwhat shall become
of the great Duke ofBuckingham.
I'll save you that labour,sir. All's now done,
but the ceremony ofbringing back the prisoner.
Were you there?
Yes, indeed, was I.
Pray, speak what hashappen'd.
You may guess quicklywhat.
Is he found guilty?
Yes, truly is he, andcondemn'd upon't.
I am sorry for't.
So are a number more.
But, pray, how pass'd it?
I'll tell you in a little.
The great duke came to thebar;
where to his accusations
He pleaded still notguilty
and alleged many sharpreasons to defeat the law.
The king's attorney on thecontrary
Urged on the examinations,proofs, confessions
Of divers witnesses;
which the duke desired tohave brought
viva voce to his face:
At which appear'd againsthim his surveyor;
Sir Gilbert Peck hischancellor; and John Car,
Confessor to him; withthat devil-monk,
Hopkins, that made thismischief.
That was he that fed himwith his prophecies?
The same.
All these accused himstrongly;
which he fain would haveflung from him,
but, indeed, he could not:
And so his peers, uponthis evidence,
Have found him guilty ofhigh treason.
Much he spoke, andlearnedly, for life;
but all was either pitiedin him or forgotten.
After all this, how did hebear himself?
When he was brought againto the bar,
to hear his knell rungout, his judgment,
he was stirr'd with suchan agony,
he sweat extremely,
And something spoke incholer, ill, and hasty:
But he fell to himselfagain,
and sweetly in all therest
show'd a most noblepatience.
I do not think he fearsdeath.
Sure, he does not:
He never was so womanish;
the cause he may a littlegrieve at.
Certainly the cardinal isthe end of this.
'Tis likely, By allconjectures:
first, Kildare'sattainder,
Then deputy of Ireland;who removed,
Earl Surrey was sentthither, and in haste too,
Lest he should help hisfather.
That trick of state was adeep envious one.
At his return no doubt hewill requite it.
This is noted, and generally,whoever the king favours,
The cardinal instantlywill find employment,
And far enough from courttoo.
All the commons hate himperniciously,
and, o' my conscience,wish him ten fathom deep:
this duke as much theylove and dote on;
call him bounteousBuckingham,
The mirror of allcourtesy;--
Stay there, sir,
And see the noble ruin'dman you speak of.
All good people,
You that thus far havecome to pity me,
Hear what I say, and thengo home and lose me.
I have this day received atraitor's judgment,
And by that name must die:yet, heaven bear witness,
And if I have a conscience,let it sink me,
Even as the axe falls, ifI be not faithful!
The law I bear no malicefor my death;
'T has done, upon thepremises, but justice:
But those that sought it Icould wish more Christians:
Be what they will, Iheartily forgive 'em:
Yet let 'em look theyglory not in mischief,
Nor build their evils onthe graves of great men;
For then my guiltless bloodmust cry against 'em.
For further life in thisworld I ne'er hope,
Nor will I sue,
although the king havemercies
more than I dare makefaults.
You few that loved me,
And dare be bold to weepfor Buckingham,
His noble friends andfellows,
whom to leave is onlybitter to him, only dying,
Go with me, like goodangels, to my end;
And, as the long divorceof steel falls on me,
Make of your prayers onesweet sacrifice,
And lift my soul toheaven.
Lead on, o' God's name.
I do beseech your grace,for charity,
If ever any malice in yourheart were hid against me,
now to forgive me frankly.
Sir Thomas Lovell,
I as free forgive you as Iwould be forgiven:
I forgive all;
There cannot be thosenumberless offences
'Gainst me, that Icannot take peace with:
no black envy shall markmy grave.
Commend me to his grace;
And if he speak ofBuckingham, pray, tell him
you met him half inheaven:
my vows and prayers yetare the king's;
and, till my soul forsake,
shall cry for blessings onhim:
may he live longer
than I have time to tellhis years!
Ever beloved and lovingmay his rule be!
And when old time shalllead him to his end,
Goodness and he fill upone monument!
To the water side I mustconduct your grace;
Then give my charge up toSir Nicholas Vaux,
Who undertakes you to yourend.
Prepare there, the duke iscoming:
see the barge be ready;
And fit it with suchfurniture
as suits the greatness ofhis person.
Nay, Sir Nicholas, Let italone;
my state now will but mockme.
When I came hither,
I was lord high constableand Duke of Buckingham;
now, poor Edward Bohun:
Yet I am richer than mybase accusers,
That never knew what truthmeant:
I now seal it; And withthat blood
will make 'em one daygroan for't.
My noble father, Henry ofBuckingham,
Who first raised headagainst usurping Richard,
Flying for succor to hisservant Banister,
Being distress'd, was bythat wretch betray'd,
And without trial fell;God's peace be with him!
Henry the Seventhsucceeding,
truly pitying my father'sloss,
like a most royal prince,restored me to my honours,
and, out of ruins, made myname once more noble.
Now his son, Henry theEighth, life, honour, name
and all that made me happy
at one stroke has takenfor ever from the world.
I had my trial, and, mustneeds say, a noble one;
which makes me, a littlehappier
than my wretched father:
Yet thus far we are one infortunes:
both gell by our servants,by those men we loved most;
A most unnatural andfaithless service!
Heaven has an end in all:yet, you that hear me,
This from a dying manreceive as certain:
Where you are liberal ofyour loves and counsels
Be sure you be not loose;
for those you make friendsand give your hearts to,
when they once perceive theleast rub in your fortunes,
fall away like waterfrom ye,
never found again but wherethey mean to sink ye.
All good people, Prayfor me!
I must now forsake ye:
the last hour of my longweary life
is come upon me.Farewell:
And when you would saysomething that is sad,
Speak how I fell. I havedone; and God forgive me!
O, this is full of pity!
Sir, it calls, I fear,
too many curses on theirbeads that were the authors.
If the duke be guiltless,
'Tis full of woe:
yet I can give you inklingof an ensuing evil,
if it fall,
Greater than this.
Good angels keep it fromus!
What may it be? You do notdoubt my faith, sir?
This secret is so weighty,
'twill require a strongfaith to conceal it.
Let me have it; I do nottalk much.
I am confident, You shall,sir:
did you not of late dayshear
A buzzing of a separation
Between the king andKatharine?
Yes, but it held not:
For when the king onceheard it, out of anger
He sent command to thelord mayor straight
To stop the rumor, andallay those tongues
That durst disperse it.
But that slander, sir,
Is found a truth now: forit grows again
Fresher than e'er it was;
and held for certain
The king will ventureat it.
Either the cardinal,
Or some about him near,
have, out of malice to thegood queen,
possess'd him with ascruple
That will undo her: toconfirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius isarrived, and lately;
As all think, for thisbusiness.
'Tis the cardinal;
And merely to revenge himon the emperor
For not bestowing on him,at his asking,
The archbishopric ofToledo, this is purposed.
I think you have hit themark:
but is't not cruel
That she should feel thesmart of this?
The cardinal will have hiswill, and she must fall.
'My lord, the horses yourlordship sent for,
with all the care I had,
I saw well chosen, ridden,and furnished.
They were young andhandsome,
and of the best breed inthe north.
When they were ready toset out for London,
a man of my lordcardinal's,
by commission and mainpower, took 'em from me;
with this reason: Hismaster would be served
before a subject, if notbefore the king;
which stopped our mouths,sir.'
I fear he will indeed:well, let him have them:
He will have all, I think.
Well met, my lordchamberlain.
Good day to both yourgraces.
How is the king employ'd?
I left him private,
Full of sad thoughts andtroubles.
What's the cause?
It seems the marriage withhis brother's wife
Has crept too near hisconscience.
No, his conscience
Has crept too near anotherlady.
'Tis so:
This is the cardinal'sdoing, the king-cardinal:
That blind priest, likethe eldest son of fortune,
Turns what he list.
The king will know him oneday.
Pray God he do! he'llnever know himself else.
How holily he works in allhis business!
And with what zeal! for,
now he has crack'd theleague
Between us and the emperor,the queen's great nephew,
He dives into the king'ssoul, and there scatters
Dangers, doubts, wringingof the conscience,
Fears, and despairs;
and all these for hismarriage:
And out of all these torestore the king,
He counsels a divorce; aloss of her
That, like a jewel, hashung twenty years
About his neck, yet neverlost her lustre;
Of her that loves him withthat excellence
That angels love good menwith; even of her
That, when the greateststroke of fortune falls,
Will bless the king: andis not this course pious?
Heaven keep me from suchcounsel! '
Tis most true these newsare every where;
every tongue speaks 'em,
And every true heart weepsfor't:
all that dare
Look into these affairssee this main end,
The French king's sister.
Heaven will one day openthe king's eyes,
that so long have sleptupon this bold bad man.
And free us from hisslavery.
We had need pray,
And heartily, for ourdeliverance;
Or this imperious man willwork us all
From princes into pages:all men's honours
Lie like one lump beforehim, to be fashion'd
Into what pitch he please.
For me, my lords,
I love him not, nor fearhim; there's my creed:
As I am made without him,so I'll stand,
If the king please; hiscurses and his blessings
Touch me alike, they'rebreath I not believe in.
I knew him, and I knowhim; so I leave him
To him that made himproud, the pope.
Let's in;
And with some otherbusiness put the king
From these sad thoughts,that work too much upon him:
My lord, you'll bear uscompany?
Excuse me;
The king has sent meotherwhere: besides,
You'll find a most unfittime to disturb him:
Health to your lordships.
Thanks, my good lordchamberlain.
How sad he looks! sure, heis much afflicted.
Who's there, ha?
Pray God he be not angry.
Who's there, I say? Howdare you thrust yourselves
Into my privatemeditations?
Who am I? ha?
A gracious king thatpardons all offences
Malice ne'er meant: ourbreach of duty this way
Is business of estate; inwhich we come
To know your royalpleasure.
Ye are too bold:
Go to; I'll make ye knowyour times of business:
Is this an hour fortemporal affairs, ha?
Who's there? my good lordcardinal? O my Wolsey,
The quiet of my woundedconscience;
Thou art a cure fit for aking.
You're welcome,
Most learned reverend sir,into our kingdom:
Use us and it.
My good lord, have greatcare
I be not found a talker.
Sir, you cannot.
I would your grace wouldgive us but an hour
Of private conference.
We are busy; go.
This priest has no pridein him?
Not to speak of:
I would not be so sickthough for his place:
But this cannot continue.
If it do,
I'll venture onehave-at-him.
I another.
Your grace has given aprecedent of wisdom
Above all princes, incommitting freely
Your scruple to the voiceof Christendom:
Who can be angry now? whatenvy reach you?
The Spaniard, tied bloodand favour to her,
Must now confess, if theyhave any goodness,
The trial just and noble.All the clerks,
I mean the learned ones,in Christian kingdoms
Have their free voices:Rome, the nurse of judgment,
Invited by your nobleself, hath sent
One general tongue untous, this good man,
This just and learnedpriest, Cardinal Campeius;
Whom once more I presentunto your highness.
And once more in mine armsI bid him welcome,
And thank the holyconclave for their loves:
They have sent me such a manI would have wish'd for.
Your grace must needs deserveall strangers' loves,
You are so noble. To yourhighness' hand
I tender my commission; bywhose virtue,
The court of Romecommanding, you, my lord
Cardinal of York, are join'dwith me their servant
In the unpartial judgingof this business.
Two equal men. The queenshall be acquainted
Forthwith for what youcome. Where's Gardiner?
I know your majesty hasalways loved her
So dear in heart, not todeny her that
A woman of less placemight ask by law:
Scholars allow'd freely toargue for her.
Ay, and the best she shallhave; and my favour
To him that does best: Godforbid else. Cardinal,
Prithee, call Gardiner tome, my new secretary:
I find him a fit fellow.
Give me your hand much joy
and favour to you; You arethe king's now.
But to be commanded
For ever by your grace,whose hand has raised me.
Come hither, Gardiner.
My Lord of York, was notone Doctor Pace
In this man's place beforehim?
Yes, he was.
Was he not held a learnedman?
Yes, surely.
Believe me, there's an illopinion spread then
Even of yourself, lordcardinal.
How! of me?
They will not stick to sayyou envied him,
And fearing he would rise,he was so virtuous,
Kept him a foreign manstill; which so grieved him,
That he ran mad and died.
Heaven's peace be withhim!
That's Christian careenough: for living murmurers
There's places of rebuke.He was a fool;
For he would needs bevirtuous: that good fellow,
If I command him, followsmy appointment:
I will have none so nearelse.
Learn this, brother,
We live not to be grip'dby meaner persons.
Deliver this with modestyto the queen.
The most convenient placethat I can think of
For such receipt oflearning is Black-Friars;
There ye shall meet aboutthis weighty business.
My Wolsey, see itfurnish'd. O, my lord,
Would it not grieve anable man to leave
So sweet a bedfellow? But,conscience, conscience!
O, 'tis a tender place;and I must leave her.
Not for that neither: here'sthe pang that pinches:
His highness having livedso long with her,
and she so good a lady
that no tongue could everpronounce
dishonour of her;
by my life, she never knewharm-doing:
O, now, after so manycourses
of the sun enthroned,
Still growing in a majestyand pomp, the which
To leave a thousand-foldmore bitter than
'Tis sweet at first toacquire,--after this process,
To give her the avaunt!
It is a pity would move amonster.
Hearts of most hard temper
Melt and lament for her.
O, God's will!
much better she ne'er hadknown pomp:
though't be temporal,
Yet, if that quarrel,fortune,
do divorce it from thebearer,
'tis a sufferance panging
As soul and body'ssevering.
Alas, poor lady!
She's a stranger nowagain.
So much the more
Must pity drop upon her.
Verily, I swear, 'tisbetter to be lowly born,
And range with humblelivers in content,
Than to be perk'd up in aglistering grief,
And wear a golden sorrow.
Our content is our besthaving.
By my troth andmaidenhead,
I would not be a queen.
Beshrew me, I would,
And venture maidenheadfor't;
and so would you,
For all this spice of yourhypocrisy:
You, that have so fairparts of woman on you,
Have too a woman's heart;
which ever yet affectedeminence, wealth, sovereignty;
Which, to say sooth, areblessings; and which gifts,
Saving your mincing,
the capacity of your softcheveril conscience
would receive,
If you might please tostretch it.
Nay, good troth.
Yes, troth, and troth; youwould not be a queen?
No, not for all the richesunder heaven.
'Tis strange: a three-pencebow'd would hire me,
Old as I am, to queen it:
but, I pray you,
What think you of aduchess?
have you limbs to bearthat load of title?
No, in truth.
Then you are weakly made:pluck off a little;
I would not be a youngcount in your way,
For more than blushingcomes to:
if your back cannotvouchsafe this burthen,
'tis too weak ever to geta boy.
How you do talk!
I swear again, I would notbe a queen
For all the world.
In faith, for littleEngland
You'ld venture anemballing:
I myself would forCarnarvonshire,
although there long'd nomore
to the crown but that.
Lo, who comes here?
Good morrow, ladies. Whatwere't worth to know
The secret of yourconference?
My good lord,
Not your demand; it valuesnot your asking:
Our mistress' sorrows wewere pitying.
It was a gentle business,
and becoming the action ofgood women:
there is hope all will bewell.
Now, I pray God, amen!
You bear a gentle mind,
and heavenly blessingsfollow such creatures.
That you may, fair lady,
Perceive I speaksincerely,
and high note's ta'en ofyour many virtues,
the king's majestycommends his good opinion
of you to you,
and does purpose honour toyou
no less flowing thanMarchioness of Pembroke:
to which title a thousandpound a year,
annual support, out of hisgrace he adds.
I do not know
What kind of my obedienceI should tender;
More than my all isnothing:
nor my prayers are notwords duly hallow'd,
nor my wishes more worththan empty vanities;
yet prayers and wishes areall I can return.
Beseech your lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak mythanks and my obedience,
As from a blushinghandmaid, to his highness;
Whose health and royalty Ipray for.
Lady, I shall not fail toapprove
the fair conceit the kinghath of you.
I have perused her well;
Beauty and honour in herare so mingled
That they have caught theking:
and who knows yet
But from this lady mayproceed a gem
To lighten all this isle?
I'll to the king, and sayI spoke with you.
My honour'd lord.
Why, this it is; see, see!
I have been beggingsixteen years in court,
Am yet a courtierbeggarly,
and you, O fate!
A very fresh-fishhere--fie, fie, fie upon
This compell'd fortune!
--have your mouth fill'dup
Before you open it.
This is strange to me.
How tastes it? is itbitter?
forty pence, no.
There was a lady once,'tis an old story,
That would not be a queen,
that would she not,
For all the mud in Egypt:have you heard it?
Come, you are pleasant.
With your theme,
I could O'ermount thelark.
The Marchioness ofPembroke!
A thousand pounds a yearfor pure respect!
No other obligation!
By my life, that promisesmoe thousands:
honour's train is longerthan his foreskirt.
By this time I know
your back will bear aduchess:
say, are you not strongerthan you were?
Good lady, Make yourselfmirth
with your particularfancy,
And leave me out on't.
Would I had no being,
If this salute my blood ajot:
it faints me to think whatfollows.
The queen is comfortless,
and we forgetful in ourlong absence:
pray, do not deliver
what here you've heard toher.
What do you think me?
Whilst our commission fromRome is read,
Let silence be commanded.
What's the need?
It hath already publiclybeen read,
And on all sides theauthority allow'd;
You may, then, spare thattime.
Say, Henry King of England,come into the court.
Henry King of England,come into the court.
Here.
Say, Katharine Queen ofEngland, come into the court.
Katharine Queen of England,come into the court.
Sir, I desire you do meright and justice;
And to bestow your pity onme:
for I am a most poorwoman,
and a stranger,
Born out of yourdominions;
having here no judgeindifferent,
nor no more assurance
Of equal friendship andproceeding.
Alas, sir, in what have Ioffended you?
what cause hath mybehavior
given to your displeasure,
That thus you shouldproceed to put me off,
And take your good gracefrom me?
Heaven witness,
I have been to you a trueand humble wife,
At all times to your willconformable;
Ever in fear to kindleyour dislike,
Yea, subject to yourcountenance,
glad or sorry as I saw itinclined:
when was the hour
I ever contradicted yourdesire,
Or made it not mine too?
Or which of your friends
Have I not strove to love,
although I knew he weremine enemy?
what friend of mine
That had to him derivedyour anger,
did I continue in myliking?
nay, gave notice he wasfrom thence discharged.
Sir, consider that I havebeen your wife,
in this obedience,
Upward of twenty years,
and have been blest withmany children by you:
if, in the course andprocess of this time,
you can report, and proveit too,
against mine honour aught,
My bond to wedlock, or mylove and duty,
Against your sacredperson, in God's name,
Turn me away;
and let the foul'stcontempt
Shut door upon me,
and so give me up to thesharp'st kind of justice.
Please you sir,
The king, your father,
was reputed for a princemost prudent,
of an excellent andunmatch'd wit and judgment:
Ferdinand, My father, kingof Spain,
was reckon'd one thewisest prince
that there had reign'd bymany
A year before:
it is not to be question'd
That they had gather'd awise council to them
Of every realm, that diddebate this business,
Who deem'd our marriagelawful:
wherefore I humbly beseechyou, sir,
to spare me, till I may be
by my friends in Spainadvised;
whose counsel I willimplore:
if not, i' the name ofGod,
Your pleasure befulfill'd!
You have here, lady,
And of your choice, thesereverend fathers;
men of singular integrityand learning,
Yea, the elect o' theland,
who are assembled to pleadyour cause:
it shall be thereforebootless
That longer you desire thecourt;
as well for your ownquiet,
as to rectify what isunsettled in the king.
His grace hath spoken welland justly:
therefore, madam,
It's fit this royalsession do proceed;
And that, without delay,
their arguments be nowproduced and heard.
Lord cardinal, to you Ispeak.
Your pleasure, madam?
Sir,I am about to weep;
but, thinking that we area queen,
or long have dream'd so,
certain the daughter of aking,
my drops of tears I'llturn to sparks of fire.
Be patient yet.
I will, when you arehumble;
nay, before, or God willpunish me.
I do believe,
Induced by potentcircumstances,
that you are mine enemy,
and make my challenge
You shall not be my judge:
for it is you have blownthis coal
betwixt my lord and me;
Which God's dew quench!
Therefore I say again,
I utterly abhor, yea, frommy soul
Refuse you for my judge;
whom, yet once more,
I hold my most maliciousfoe,
and think not at all afriend to truth.
I do profess
You speak not likeyourself;
who ever yet have stood tocharity,
and display'd the effectsof wisdom
and disposition gentle,
o'ertopping woman's power.
Madam, you do me wrong:
I have no spleen againstyou;
nor injustice for you orany:
how far I have proceeded,
Or how far further shall,
is warranted by a commissionfrom the consistory,
Yea, the whole consistoryof Rome.
You charge me that I haveblown this coal:
I do deny it:
The king is present:
if it be known to him thatI gainsay my deed,
how may he wound,
And worthily, myfalsehood!
yea, as much as you havedone my truth.
If he know that I am freeof your report,
he knows I am not of yourwrong.
Therefore in him it liesto cure me:
and the cure is,
to remove these thoughtsfrom you:
the which before hishighness shall speak in,
I do beseech you, graciousmadam,
to unthink your speakingand to say so no more.
My lord,
my lord, I am a simplewoman,
much too weak to opposeyour cunning.
You're meek andhumble-mouth'd;
You sign your place andcalling,
in full seeming,
With meekness andhumility;
but your heart is cramm'dwith arrogancy,
spleen, and pride.
You have, by fortune andhis highness' favours,
Gone slightly o'er lowsteps and now are mounted
Where powers are yourretainers, and your words,
Domestics to you, serveyour will as't please
Yourself pronounce theiroffice.
I must warn you, You tendermore your person's honour
than your high professionspiritual:
that again I do refuse youfor my judge;
and here, Before you all,
appeal unto the pope,
To bring my whole cause'fore his holiness,
And to be judged by him.
The queen is obstinate,
Stubborn to justice, aptto accuse it,
and disdainful to be triedby't: '
tis not well.
She's going away.
Call her again.
Katharine Queen of England,come into the court.
Madam, you are call'dback.
What need you note it?pray you, keep your way:
When you are call'd,return.
Now, the Lord help,
They vex me past mypatience!
Pray you, pass on:
I will not tarry; no,
nor ever more upon thisbusiness
my appearance make in anyof their courts.
Go thy ways, Kate:
That man i' the world
who shall report he has abetter wife,
let him in nought betrusted,
For speaking false inthat:
thou art, alone, if thyrare qualities,
sweet gentleness,
Thy meekness saint-like,wife-like government,
Obeying in commanding, andthy parts
Sovereign and pious else,could speak thee out,
The queen of earthlyqueens: she's noble born;
And, like her truenobility,
she has carried herselftowards me.
Most gracious sir,
In humblest manner Irequire your highness,
That it shall please youto declare,
in hearing of all theseears,
--for where I am robb'dand bound,
There must I be unloosed,
although not there at onceand fully satisfied,
--whether ever I didbroach
this business to yourhighness;
or laid any scruple inyour way,
which might induce you tothe question on't?
or ever have to you,
but with thanks to God
for such a royal lady,
spake one the least word
that might be to theprejudice
of her present state,
Or touch of her goodperson?
My lord cardinal, I doexcuse you;
yea, upon mine honour, Ifree you from't.
You are not to be taught
That you have manyenemies,
that know not why they areso,
but, like to village-curs,
Bark when their fellowsdo:
by some of these the queenis put in anger.
You're excused:
But will you be morejustified?
You ever have wish'd thesleeping of this business;
never desired it to bestirr'd;
but oft have hinder'd,oft,
The passages made towardit:
on my honour,
I speak my good lordcardinal to this point,
And thus far clear him.
Now, what moved me to't,
I will be bold with timeand your attention:
Then mark the inducement.
Thus it came; give heedto't:
My conscience firstreceived a tenderness,
Scruple, and prick,
on certain speechesutter'd
by the Bishop of Bayonne,
then French ambassador;
Who had been hither senton the debating
A marriage 'twixt the Dukeof Orleans
and our daughter Mary:
i' the progress of thisbusiness,
Ere a determinateresolution,
he, I mean the bishop, didrequire a respite;
Wherein he might the kinghis lord advertise
Whether our daughter werelegitimate,
Respecting this ourmarriage with the dowager,
Sometimes our brother'swife.
This respite shook thebosom of my conscience,
enter'd me, Yea, with asplitting power,
and made to tremble theregion of my breast;
which forced such way,
That many mazedconsiderings did throng
And press'd in with thiscaution.
First, methought I stoodnot
in the smile of heaven;
who had commanded nature,that my lady's womb,
If it conceived a malechild by me,
should do no more officesof life to't
than the grave does to thedead;
for her male issue or diedwhere they were made,
or shortly after thisworld had air'd them:
hence I took a thought,
This was a judgment on me;
that my kingdom,
Well worthy the best heiro' the world,
should not be gladded in'tby me:
then follows, that Iweigh'd the danger
which my realms stood inby this my issue's fail;
and that gave to me many agroaning throe.
Thus hulling in the wildsea of my conscience,
I did steer toward thisremedy,
whereupon we are nowpresent here together:
that's to say, I meant torectify my conscience,
--which I then did feelfull sick,
and yet not well,--
By all the reverendfathers of the land
And doctors learn'd:
first I began in private
With you, my Lord ofLincoln;
you remember how under myoppression I did reek,
When I first moved you.
Very well, my liege.
I have spoke long:
be pleased yourself to say
How far you satisfied me.
So please your highness,
The question did at firstso stagger me,
Bearing a state of mightymoment in't
And consequence of dread,
that I committed thedaring'st counsel
which I had to doubt;
And did entreat yourhighness
to this course which youare running here.
I then moved you,
My Lord of Canterbury;
and got your leave to makethis present summons:
unsolicited I left noreverend person
in this court;
But by particular consent
proceeded under your handsand seals:
therefore, go on:
For no dislike i' theworld
against the person of thegood queen,
but the sharp thorny pointsof my alleged reasons,
drive this forward:
Prove but our marriagelawful,
by my life and kinglydignity,
we are contented
To wear our mortal stateto come with her,
Katharine our queen,
before the primestcreature
That's paragon'd o' theworld.
So please your highness,
The queen being absent,
'tis a needful fitnessthat we adjourn this court
till further day:
Meanwhile must be anearnest motion
Made to the queen, to callback her appeal
She intends unto hisholiness.
I may perceive thesecardinals trifle with me:
I abhor this dilatorysloth and tricks of Rome.
My learn'd and well-belovedservant, Cranmer,
Prithee, return:
with thy approach, I know,
My comfort comes along.
Break up the court:
I say, set on.
Take thy lute, wench:
my soul grows sad withtroubles;
Sing, and disperse 'em, ifthou canst:
leave working.
Orpheus with his lute madetrees,
And the mountain tops thatfreeze,
Bow themselves when he didsing:
To his music plants andflowers
Ever sprung; as sun andshowers
There had made a lastingspring.
Every thing that heard himplay,
Even the billows of thesea,
Hung their heads, and thenlay by.
In sweet music is suchart,
Killing care and grief ofheart
Fall asleep, or hearing,die.
How now!
An't please your grace,
the two great cardinalswait in the presence.
Would they speak with me?
They will'd me say so,madam.
Pray their graces to comenear.
What can be their businesswith me,
a poor weak woman, fall'nfrom favour?
I do not like theircoming.
Now I think on't,
They should be good men;
their affairs as righteous:
But all hoods make notmonks.
Peace to your highness!
Your graces find me herepart of a housewife,
I would be all, againstthe worst may happen.
What are your pleasureswith me, reverend lords?
May it please you noblemadam,
to withdraw into yourprivate chamber,
we shall give you the fullcause of our coming.
Speak it here:
There's nothing I havedone yet,
o' my conscience, deservesa corner:
would all other womencould speak this
with as free a soul as Ido!
My lords, I care not,
so much I am happy above anumber,
if my actions were triedby every tongue,
every eye saw 'em,
Envy and base opinion setagainst 'em,
I know my life so even.
If your business seek meout,
and that way I am wife in,
Out with it boldly: truthloves open dealing.
Tanta est erga te mentisintegritas,
regina serenissima,--
O, good my lord, no Latin;
I am not such a truantsince my coming,
As not to know thelanguage I have lived in:
A strange tongue makes mycause more strange,
suspicious;
Pray, speak in English:
here are some will thankyou, if you speak truth,
for their poor mistress'sake;
lord cardinal,
The willing'st sin I everyet committed
May be absolved inEnglish.
Noble lady,
I am sorry my integrityshould breed,
And service to his majestyand you,
So deep suspicion, whereall faith was meant.
We come not by the way ofaccusation,
To taint that honour everygood tongue blesses,
Nor to betray you any wayto sorrow,
You have too much, goodlady;
but to know how you standminded
in the weighty difference
Between the king and you;and to deliver,
Like free and honest men,
our just opinions andcomforts to your cause.
Most honour'd madam,
My Lord of York, out ofhis noble nature,
Zeal and obedience hestill bore your grace,
Forgetting, like a goodman your late censure
Both of his truth and him,which was too far,
Offers, as I do, in a signof peace,
His service and hiscounsel.
My lords, I thank you bothfor your good wills;
Ye speak like honest men;pray God, ye prove so!
But how to make yesuddenly an answer,
In such a point of weight,so near mine honour,
More near my life, I fear,
with my weak wit,
And to such men of gravityand learning,
In truth, I know not.
I was set at work among mymaids:
full little, God knows,
looking either for suchmen or such business.
For her sake that I havebeen,
for I feel the last fit ofmy greatness,
good your graces,
Let me have time andcounsel for my cause:
Alas, I am a woman,friendless, hopeless!
Madam, you wrong the king'slove with these fears:
Your hopes and friends areinfinite.
In England
But little for my profit:
can you think, lords,
That any Englishman daregive me counsel?
Or be a known friend, 'gainsthis highness' pleasure,
Though he be grown sodesperate to be honest,
And live a subject?
Nay, forsooth, my friends,
They that must weigh outmy afflictions,
They that my trust mustgrow to, live not here:
They are, as all my othercomforts,
far hence In mine owncountry, lords.
I would your grace
Would leave your griefs,and take my counsel.
How, sir?
Put your main cause intothe king's protection;
He's loving and mostgracious: 'twill be much
Both for your honourbetter and your cause;
For if the trial of thelaw o'ertake ye,
You'll part awaydisgraced.
He tells you rightly.
Ye tell me what ye wishfor both,
my ruin:
Is this your Christiancounsel? out upon ye!
Heaven is above all yet;
there sits a judge that noking can corrupt.
Your rage mistakes us.
The more shame for ye:
holy men I thought ye,
Upon my soul, two reverendcardinal virtues;
But cardinal sins andhollow hearts I fear ye:
Mend 'em, for shame, mylords.
Is this your comfort?
The cordial that ye bringa wretched lady,
A woman lost among ye,laugh'd at, scorn'd?
I will not wish ye half mymiseries;
I have more charity:
but say, I warn'd ye;
Take heed, for heaven'ssake, take heed,
lest at once the burthenof my sorrows
fall upon ye.
Madam, this is a meredistraction;
You turn the good we offerinto envy.
Ye turn me into nothing:
out upon ye and all suchfalse professors!
would you have me
If you have any justice,any pity;
If ye be any thing butchurchmen's habits
Put my sick cause into hishands that hates me?
Alas, has banish'd me hisbed already,
His love, too long ago!
I am old, my lords,
And all the fellowship Ihold now with him
Is only my obedience.
What can happen to meabove this wretchedness?
all your studies make me acurse like this.
Your fears are worse.
Have I lived thuslong--let me speak myself,
Since virtue finds nofriends--a wife, a true one?
A woman, I dare saywithout vain-glory,
Never yet branded withsuspicion?
Have I with all my fullaffections
Still met the king?
loved him next heaven?obey'd him?
Been, out of fondness,superstitious to him?
Almost forgot my prayersto content him?
And am I thus rewarded?
'tis not well, lords.
Bring me a constant womanto her husband,
One that ne'er dream'd ajoy beyond his pleasure;
And to that woman, whenshe has done most,
Yet will I add an honour,a great patience.
Madam, you wander from thegood we aim at.
My lord, I dare not makemyself so guilty,
To give up willingly thatnoble title
Your master wed me to:
nothing but death shalle'er divorce my dignities.
Pray, hear me.
Would I had never trodthis English earth,
Or felt the flatteriesthat grow upon it!
Ye have angels' faces, butheaven knows your hearts.
What will become of menow, wretched lady!
I am the most unhappywoman living.
Alas, poor wenches, whereare now your fortunes!
Shipwreck'd upon akingdom,
where no pity, no friend,no hope;
no kindred weep for me;
Almost no grave allow'dme:
like the lily, that oncewas mistress of the field
and flourish'd,
I'll hang my head andperish.
If your grace could but bebrought to know
our ends are honest,
You'ld feel more comfort:
why should we, good lady,
Upon what cause, wrongyou?
alas, our places,
The way of our professionis against it:
We are to cure suchsorrows, not to sow 'em.
For goodness' sake,consider what you do;
How you may hurt yourself,
ay, utterly grow from theking's acquaintance,
by this carriage.
The hearts of princes kissobedience,
So much they love it;
but to stubborn spiritsthey swell, and grow
as terrible as storms.
I know you have a gentle,noble temper,
A soul as even as a calm:
pray, think us those weprofess,
peace-makers, friends, andservants.
Madam, you'll find it so.
You wrong your virtues
With these weak women'sfears:
a noble spirit, as yourswas put into you,
ever casts such doubts, asfalse coin, from it.
The king loves you;
Beware you lose it not:for us,
if you please to trust usin your business,
we are ready to use ourutmost studies
in your service.
Do what ye will, my lords:
and, pray, forgive me,
If I have used myselfunmannerly;
You know I am a woman,
lacking wit to make a seemlyanswer to such persons.
Pray, do my service to hismajesty:
He has my heart yet;
and shall have my prayerswhile I shall have my life.
Come, reverend fathers,
Bestow your counsels onme:
she now begs, that littlethought,
when she set footing here,
She should have bought herdignities so dear.
If you will now unite inyour complaints,
And force them with aconstancy,
the cardinal cannot standunder them:
if you omit the offer ofthis time,
I cannot promise
But that you shall sustainmoe new disgraces,
With these you bearalready.
I am joyful to meet theleast occasion
that may give me
Remembrance of myfather-in-law, the duke,
To be revenged on him.
Which of the peers haveuncontemn'd gone by him,
or at least strangelyneglected?
when did he regard thestamp of nobleness
in any person out ofhimself?
My lords, you speak yourpleasures:
What he deserves of youand me I know;
What we can do to him,
though now the time givesway to us, I much fear.
If you cannot bar hisaccess to the king,
never attempt any thing onhim;
for he hath a witchcraft
Over the king in's tongue.
O, fear him not;
His spell in that is out:
the king hath found matteragainst him
that for ever mars thehoney of his language.
No, he's settled,
Not to come off, in hisdispleasure.
Sir, I should be glad tohear such news as this
Once every hour.
Believe it, this is true:
In the divorce hiscontrary proceedings
Are all unfolded
wherein he appears as Iwould wish mine enemy.
How came his practises tolight?
Most strangely.
O, how, how?
The cardinal's letters tothe pope miscarried,
And came to the eye o' theking: wherein was read,
How that the cardinal didentreat his holiness
To stay the judgment o'the divorce;
for if it did take place,'I do,' quoth he,
'perceive my king istangled in affection
to a creature of thequeen's, Lady Anne Bullen.'
Has the king this?
Believe it.
Will this work?
The king in this perceiveshim,
how he coasts and hedgeshis own way.
But in this point all histricks founder,
and he brings his physic
After his patient's death:
the king already hathmarried the fair lady.
Would he had!
May you be happy in yourwish, my lord
For, I profess, youhave it.
Now, all my joy trace theconjunction!
My amen to't!
All men's!
There's order given forher coronation:
Marry, this is yet butyoung,
and may be left to someears unrecounted.
But, will the king
Digest this letter of thecardinal's?
The Lord forbid!
Marry, amen!
No, no; there be moe wasps
that buzz about his nose
Will make this sting thesooner.
Cardinal Campeius isstol'n away to Rome;
hath ta'en no leave;
Has left the cause o' theking unhandled;
and is posted, as theagent of our cardinal,
To second all his plot.
I do assure you the kingcried Ha! at this.
Now, God incense him,
And let him cry Ha!louder!
But, my lord, when returnsCranmer?
He is return'd in hisopinions;
which have satisfied theking for his divorce,
Together with all famouscolleges
Almost in Christendom:
shortly, I believe,
His second marriage shallbe publish'd,
and her coronation.
Katharine no more shall becall'd queen,
but princess dowager andwidow to Prince Arthur.
This same Cranmer's
A worthy fellow, and hathta'en much pain
In the king's business.
The packet, Cromwell.Gave't you the king?
To his own hand, in'sbedchamber.
Look'd he o' the inside ofthe paper?
Presently he did unsealthem:
and the first he view'd,
He did it with a seriousmind;
a heed was in hiscountenance.
You he bade attend himhere this morning.
Is he ready to comeabroad?
I think, by this he is.
Leave me awhile.
It shall be to the Duchessof Alencon,
The French king's sister:he shall marry her.
Anne Bullen! No; I'll noAnne Bullens for him:
There's more in't thanfair visage.
Bullen! No, we'll noBullens.
Speedily I wish to hearfrom Rome.
The Marchioness ofPembroke!
He's discontented.
May be, he hears the king
does whet his anger tohim.
Sharp enough, Lord, forthy justice!
The late queen'sgentlewoman,
a knight's daughter,
To be her mistress'mistress! the queen's queen!
This candle burns notclear:
'tis I must snuff it;
Then out it goes.
What though I know hervirtuous and well deserving?
yet I know her for aspleeny Lutheran;
and not wholesome to ourcause,
that she should lie i' thebosom of our
hard-ruled king.
Again, there is sprung upan heretic,
an arch one, Cranmer;
one hath crawl'd into thefavour of the king,
And is his oracle.
He is vex'd at something.
I would 'twere somethingthat would fret the string,
The master-cord on'sheart!
The king, the king!
What piles of wealth hathhe accumulated
To his own portion!
and what expense by thehour
seems to flow from him!
How, i' the name ofthrift,
Does he rake thistogether!
Now, my lords, saw you thecardinal?
My lord, we have stoodhere observing him:
some strange commotion isin his brain:
he bites his lip, andstarts;
Stops on a sudden, looksupon the ground,
Then lays his finger onhis temple,
straight springs out intofast gait;
then stops again,
Strikes his breast hard,
and anon he casts his eyeagainst the moon:
in most strange postures wehave seen him set himself.
It may well be;
There is a mutiny in'smind.
This morning papers ofstate he sent me to peruse,
As I required:
and wot you what I foundthere,
on my conscience, putunwittingly?
Forsooth, an inventory,thus importing;
The several parcels of hisplate, his treasure,
Rich stuffs, and ornamentsof household;
which I find at such proudrate,
that it out-speakspossession of a subject.
It's heaven's will:
Some spirit put this paperin the packet,
To bless your eye withal.
If we did think hiscontemplation
were above the earth,
And fix'd on spiritualobject,
he should still dwell inhis musings:
but I am afraid his thinkingsare below the moon,
not worth his seriousconsidering.
Heaven forgive me!
Ever God bless yourhighness!
Good my lord,
You are full of heavenlystuff,
and bear the inventory ofyour best graces
in your mind;
the which you were nowrunning o'er:
you have scarce time
To steal from spiritualleisure
a brief span to keep yourearthly audit:
sure, in that I deem youan ill husband,
and am glad to have youtherein my companion.
Sir,For holy offices Ihave a time;
a time to think upon thepart of business
which I bear i' the state;
and nature does requireher times of preservation,
which perforce I, herfrail son,
amongst my brethrenmortal,
Must give my tendence to.
You have said well.
And ever may your highnessyoke together,
As I will lend you cause,
my doing well with my wellsaying!
'Tis well said again;
And 'tis a kind of gooddeed to say well:
And yet words are nodeeds.
My father loved you:
His said he did;
and with his deed didcrown his word upon you.
Since I had my office,
I have kept you next myheart;
have not alone employ'dyou
where high profits mightcome home,
But pared my presenthavings,
to bestow my bounties uponyou.
Have I not made you, theprime man of the state?
I pray you, tell me,
If what I now pronounceyou have found true:
And, if you may confessit, say withal,
If you are bound to us orno.
What say you?
My sovereign, I confessyour royal graces,
Shower'd on me daily, havebeen more
than could my studiedpurposes requite;
which went beyond allman's endeavours:
my endeavours have evercome too short
of my desires,
Yet filed with myabilities:
mine own ends have beenmine
so that evermore theypointed
To the good of your mostsacred person
and the profit of thestate.
For your great gracesheap'd upon me,
poor undeserver, I cannothing
render but allegiantthanks,
My prayers to heaven foryou, my loyalty,
Which ever has and evershall be growing,
Till death, that winter,kill it.
Fairly answer'd;
A loyal and obedientsubject
is therein illustrated:
the honour of it does paythe act of it;
as, i' the contrary,
The foulness is thepunishment.
I presume that,
as my hand has open'dbounty to you,
My heart dropp'd love,
my power rain'd honour,
more on you than any;
so your hand and heart,
Your brain, and everyfunction of your power,
Should, notwithstandingthat your bond of duty,
As 'twere in love'sparticular,
be more to me, yourfriend, than any.
I do profess
That for your highness'good I ever labour'd
More than mine own;
that am, have, and will be
Though all the worldshould crack
their duty to you,
And throw it from theirsoul;
though perils did abound,
as thick as thought couldmake 'em,
and appear in forms morehorrid,
yet my duty, as doth a rockagainst the chiding flood,
Should the approach ofthis wild river break,
And stand unshaken yours.
'Tis nobly spoken:
Take notice, lords, he hasa loyal breast,
For you have seen himopen't.
Read o'er this; and after,this:
and then to breakfast
with what appetite youhave.
What should this mean?
What sudden anger's this?how have I reap'd it?
He parted frowning fromme,
as if ruin leap'd from hiseyes:
so looks the chafed lionupon the daring huntsman
that has gall'd him;
Then makes him nothing.
I must read this paper;
I fear, the story of hisanger.
'Tis so; This paper hasundone me:
'tis the account of allthat world of wealth
I have drawn together formine own ends;
indeed, to gain thepopedom,
And fee my friends inRome.
O negligence!
Fit for a fool to fall by:
what cross devil made meput this main secret
in the packet I sent theking?
Is there no way to curethis?
No new device to beat thisfrom his brains?
I know 'twill stir himstrongly;
yet I know a way, if it takeright, in spite of fortune
Will bring me off again.
What's this? 'To thePope!'
The letter, as I live,
with all the business Iwrit to's holiness.
Nay then, farewell!
I have touch'd the highestpoint of all my greatness;
And, from that fullmeridian of my glory,
I haste now to mysetting:
I shall fall like a brightexhalation
in the evening,
And no man see me more.
Hear the king's pleasure,cardinal:
who commands you to renderup the great seal
presently into our hands;
and to confine yourself toAsher House,
my Lord of Winchester's,
Till you hear further fromhis highness.
Stay:
Where's your commission,lords?
words cannot carryauthority so weighty.
Who dare cross 'em,
Bearing the king's willfrom his mouth expressly?
Till I find more than willor words to do it,
I mean your malice, know,officious lords,
I dare and must deny it.
Now I feel of what coarsemetal ye are moulded,
envy:
How eagerly ye follow mydisgraces,
As if it fed ye!
and how sleek and wanton
Ye appear in every thingmay bring my ruin!
Follow your enviouscourses, men of malice;
You have Christian warrantfor 'em,
and, no doubt, in time
will find their fitrewards.
That seal, you ask withsuch a violence,
the king, mine and yourmaster,
with his own hand gave me;
Bade me enjoy it, with theplace and honours,
During my life; and, toconfirm his goodness,
Tied it by letters-patents:now, who'll take it?
The king, that gave it.
It must be himself, then.
Thou art a proud traitor,priest.
Proud lord, thou liest:
Within these forty hours
Surrey durst better
Have burnt that tonguethan said so.
Thy ambition, thou scarletsin,
robb'd this bewailing landof noble Buckingham,
my father-in-law:
The heads of all thybrother cardinals,
With thee and all thy bestparts bound together,
Weigh'd not a hair of his.
Plague of your policy!
You sent me deputy forIreland;
Far from his succor, fromthe king,
from all that might havemercy
on the fault thou gavesthim;
Whilst your great goodness,out of holy pity,
Absolved him with an axe.
This, and all else thistalking lord
can lay upon my credit,
I answer is most false.
The duke by law found hisdeserts:
how innocent I was
From any private malice inhis end,
His noble jury and foulcause can witness.
If I loved many words,lord,
I should tell you
You have as little honestyas honour,
Your long coat, priest,protects you;
thou shouldst feel mysword
i' the life-blood of theeelse.
My lords,
Can ye endure to hear thisarrogance?
And from this fellow?
if we live thus tamely,
To be thus jaded by apiece of scarlet,
Farewell nobility; let hisgrace go forward,
And dare us with his caplike larks.
All goodness is poison tothy stomach.
Yes, that goodness ofgleaning
all the land's wealth intoone
Into your own hands,
cardinal, by extortion;
The goodness of yourintercepted packets
You writ to the popeagainst the king:
your goodness, since youprovoke me,
shall be most notorious.
My Lord of Norfolk, as youare truly noble,
As you respect the commongood,
the state of our despisednobility,
our issues, who, if helive,
will scarce be gentlemen,
Produce the grand sum ofhis sins,
the articles collectedfrom his life.
I'll startle you worsethan the scaring bell,
when the brown wench laykissing in your arms,
lord cardinal.
How much, methinks, Icould despise this man,
But that I am bound incharity against it!
Those articles, my lord,are in the king's hand:
But, thus much, they arefoul ones.
So much fairer andspotless
shall mine innocencearise,
When the king knows mytruth.
This cannot save you:
I thank my memory,
I yet remember some ofthese articles;
and out they shall.
Now, if you can blush andcry 'guilty,' cardinal,
You'll show a littlehonesty.
Speak on, sir;
I dare your worstobjections:
if I blush,
It is to see a noblemanwant manners.
I had rather want thosethan my head.
Have at you!
First, that, without theking's assent or knowledge,
You wrought to be alegate;
by which power you maim'dthe jurisdiction
of all bishops.
Then, that in all you writto Rome,
or else to foreignprinces, 'Ego et Rex meus'
Was still inscribed; inwhich you brought the king
To be your servant.
Then that, without theknowledge
Either of king or council,
when you went ambassadorto the emperor,
you made bold to carryinto Flanders
the great seal.
Item, you sent a largecommission
To Gregory de Cassado, toconclude,
Without the king's will orthe state's allowance,
A league between hishighness and Ferrara.
That, out of mereambition,
you have caused your holyhat
to be stamp'd on theking's coin.
Then that you have sentinnumerable substance
By what means got, I leaveto your own conscience
To furnish Rome, and toprepare the ways
You have for dignities;
to the mere undoing of allthe kingdom.
Many more there are;
Which, since they are ofyou, and odious,
I will not taint my mouthwith.
O my lord, Press not afalling man too far! '
tis virtue:
His faults lie open to thelaws;
let them, not you, correcthim.
My heart weeps to see him solittle of his great self.
I forgive him.
Lord cardinal, the king'sfurther pleasure is,
Because all those thingsyou have done of late,
By your power legatine,within this kingdom,
Fall into the compass of apraemunire,
That therefore such a writbe sued against you;
To forfeit all your goods,lands, tenements,
Chattels, and whatsoever,
and to be out of theking's protection.
This is my charge.
And so we'll leave you toyour meditations
How to live better.
For your stubborn answer
About the giving back thegreat seal to us,
The king shall know it,
and, no doubt, shall thankyou.
So fare you well, mylittle good lord cardinal.
So farewell to the littlegood you bear me.
Farewell! a long farewell,to all my greatness!
This is the state of man:
to-day he puts forth thetender leaves of hopes;
to-morrow blossoms,
And bears his blushinghonours thick upon him;
The third day comes afrost,
a killing frost,
And, when he thinks, goodeasy man,
full surely his greatnessis a-ripening,
nips his root, and then hefalls, as I do.
I have ventured, likelittle wanton boys
that swim on bladders,
This many summers in a seaof glory,
But far beyond my depth:
my high-blown pride atlength broke under me
and now has left me,
Weary and old withservice,
to the mercy of a rudestream,
that must for ever hideme.
Vain pomp and glory ofthis world,
I hate ye:
I feel my heart newopen'd.
O, how wretched is thatpoor man
that hangs on princes'favours!
There is, betwixt thatsmile we would aspire to,
That sweet aspect ofprinces,
and their ruin,
More pangs and fears thanwars or women have:
And when he falls, hefalls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.
Why, how now, Cromwell!
I have no power to speak,sir.
What, amazed at mymisfortunes?
can thy spirit wonder agreat man should decline?
Nay, an you weep, I amfall'n indeed.
How does your grace?
Why, well;
Never so truly happy, mygood Cromwell.
I know myself now;
and I feel within me apeace
above all earthlydignities,
A still and quietconscience.
The king has cured me,
I humbly thank his grace;
and from these shoulders,
These ruin'd pillars, outof pity,
taken a load would sink anavy,
too much honour:
O, 'tis a burthen,Cromwell,
'tis a burthen too heavy
for a man that hopes forheaven!
I am glad your grace hasmade that right use of it.
I hope I have: I am ablenow, methinks,
Out of a fortitude of soulI feel,
To endure more miseriesand greater far
Than my weak-heartedenemies dare offer.
What news abroad?
The heaviest and the worst
Is your displeasure withthe king.
God bless him!
The next is, that SirThomas More is chosen
Lord chancellor in yourplace.
That's somewhat sudden:
But he's a learned man.
May he continue long inhis highness' favour,
and do justice for truth'ssake and his conscience;
that his bones,
When he has run his courseand sleeps in blessings,
May have a tomb oforphans' tears wept on em!
What more?
That Cranmer is return'dwith welcome,
Install'd lord archbishopof Canterbury.
That's news indeed.
Last, that the Lady Anne,
Whom the king hath insecrecy long married,
This day was view'd inopen as his queen,
Going to chapel;
and the voice is now
Only about her coronation.
There was the weight thatpull'd me down.
O Cromwell, The king hasgone beyond me:
all my glories in that onewoman
I have lost for ever:
No sun shall ever usherforth mine honours,
Or gild again the nobletroops that waited
Upon my smiles.
Go, get thee from me,Cromwell;
I am a poor fall'n man,
unworthy now to be thylord and master:
seek the king;
That sun, I pray, maynever set!
I have told him what andhow true thou art:
he will advance thee;
Some little memory of mewill stir him
I know his noble nature
not to let thy hopefulservice perish too:
good Cromwell, Neglect himnot;
make use now,
and provide for thine ownfuture safety.
O my lord, must I, then,leave you?
must I needs forego sogood, so noble
and so true a master?
Bear witness, all thathave not hearts of iron,
With what a sorrowCromwell leaves his lord.
The king shall have myservice:
but my prayers for ever
and for ever shall beyours.
Cromwell, I did not thinkto shed a tear
In all my miseries;
but thou hast forced me,
Out of thy honest truth,to play the woman.
Let's dry our eyes:
and thus far hear me,Cromwell;
And, when I am forgotten,as I shall be,
And sleep in dull coldmarble,
where no mention of memore must be heard of,
say, I taught thee,
Say, Wolsey, that oncetrod the ways of glory,
And sounded all the depthsand shoals of honour,
Found thee a way, out ofhis wreck, to rise in;
A sure and safe one, thoughthy master miss'd it.
Mark but my fall, and thatthat ruin'd me.
Cromwell, I charge thee,fling away ambition:
By that sin fell theangels; how can man, then,
The image of his Maker,hope to win by it?
Love thyself last:
cherish those hearts thathate thee;
Corruption wins not morethan honesty.
Still in thy right handcarry gentle peace,
To silence envioustongues.
Be just, and fear not:
Let all the ends thouaim'st at be thy country's,
Thy God's, and truth's;then if thou fall'st,
O Cromwell, thou fall'st ablessed martyr!
Serve the king; And,prithee, lead me in:
There take an inventory ofall I have,
To the last penny; 'tisthe king's:
my robe, and my integrityto heaven,
is all I dare now callmine own.
O Cromwell, Cromwell!
Had I but served my Godwith half the zeal
I served my king,
he would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mineenemies.
Good sir, have patience.
So I have. Farewell
The hopes of court! myhopes in heaven do dwell.
You're well met onceagain.
So are you.
You come to take yourstand here,
and behold The Lady Anne
pass from her coronation?
'Tis all my business.
At our last encounter,
The Duke of Buckinghamcame from his trial.
'Tis very true: but thattime offer'd sorrow;
This, general joy.
'Tis well: the citizens, Iam sure,
have shown at full theirroyal minds
As, let 'em have theirrights, they are ever forward
In celebration of this daywith shows,
Pageants and sights ofhonour.
Never greater,
Nor, I'll assure you,better taken, sir.
May I be bold to ask atwhat that contains,
That paper in your hand?
Yes; 'tis the list
Of those that claim theiroffices this day
By custom of thecoronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is thefirst,
and claims to behigh-steward;
next, the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be earl marshal:
you may read the rest.
I thank you, sir:
had I not known thosecustoms,
I should have beenbeholding to your paper.
But, I beseech you, what'sbecome of Katharine,
The princess dowager? howgoes her business?
That I can tell you too.
The Archbishop ofCanterbury,
accompanied with otherlearned and reverend fathers
of his order,
Held a late court atDunstable,
six miles off from Ampthillwhere the princess lay;
to which she was oftencited by them,
but appear'd not:
And, to be short, for notappearance
and the king's latescruple,
by the main assent of allthese learned men
she was divorced,
And the late marriage madeof none effect
Since which she wasremoved to Kimbolton,
Where she remains nowsick.
Alas, good lady!
(trumpets sound)
The trumpets sound!
Stand close, the queen iscoming!
A royal train, believe me.These I know:
Who's that that bears thesceptre?
Marquess Dorset:
And that the Earl ofSurrey, with the rod.
A bold brave gentleman.
That should be the Duke ofSuffolk?
'Tis the same:high-steward.
And that my Lord ofNorfolk?
Yes;
Heaven bless thee!
Thou hast the sweetestface I ever look'd on.
Sir, as I have a soul, sheis an angel;
Our king has all theIndies in his arms,
And more and richer, whenhe strains that lady:
I cannot blame hisconscience.
They that bear the clothof honour over her,
are four barons of theCinque-ports.
Those men are happy; andso are all are near her.
I take it, she thatcarries up the train
Is that old noble lady,Duchess of Norfolk.
It is; and all the restare countesses.
Their coronets say so.These are stars indeed;
And sometimes fallingones.
No more of that.
How does your grace?
O Griffith, sick to death!
My legs, like loadenbranches, bow to the earth,
Willing to leave theirburthen.
Reach a chair:
So; now, methinks, I feela little ease.
Didst thou not tell me,Griffith,
as thou led'st me,
That the great child ofhonour,
Cardinal Wolsey, Was dead?
Yes, madam; but I thinkyour grace,
Out of the pain yousuffer'd, gave no ear to't.
Prithee, good Griffith,tell me how he died:
If well, he stepp'd beforeme,
happily for my example.
Well, the voice goes,madam:
For after the stout EarlNorthumberland
Arrested him at York,
and brought him forward,
As a man sorely tainted,to his answer,
He fell sick suddenly, andgrew so ill
He could not sit his mule.
Alas, poor man!
At last, with easy roads,he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the abbey;
where the reverend abbot,
With all his covent,
honourably received him;
and, three nights afterthis,
About the hour of eight,
which he himself Foretoldshould be his last,
He gave his honours to theworld again,
His blessed part toheaven,
and slept in peace.
So may he rest; his faultslie gently on him!
Yet thus far, Griffith,
give me leave to speakhim,
And yet with charity.
He was a man of anunbounded stomach,
ever ranking himself withprinces;
one that, by suggestion,
Tied all the kingdom:simony was fair-play;
His own opinion was hislaw:
i' the presence he wouldsay untruths;
and be ever double both inhis words and meaning:
he was never, but where hemeant to ruin,
pitiful: his promiseswere,
as he then was, mighty;
But his performance, as heis now, nothing:
Noble madam,
Men's evil manners live inbrass;
their virtues we write inwater.
May it please yourhighness
To hear me speak his goodnow?
Yes, good Griffith;
I were malicious else.
This cardinal,
Though from an humblestock,
undoubtedly was fashion'dto much honour
from his cradle.
He was a scholar, and aripe and good one;
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken,and persuading:
Lofty and sour to themthat loved him not;
But to those men thatsought him
sweet as summer.
His overthrow heap'dhappiness upon him;
For then, and not tillthen, he felt himself,
And found the blessednessof being little:
And, to add greaterhonours to his age
Than man could give him,he died fearing God.
After my death I wish noother herald,
No other speaker of myliving actions,
To keep mine honour fromcorruption,
But such an honestchronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated living,
thou hast made me,
With thy religious truthand modesty,
Now in his ashes honour:
peace be with him!
Patience, be near mestill; and set me lower:
I have not long to troublethee.
Good Griffith, cause themusicians
play me that sad note
I named my knell, whilst Isit meditating
On that celestial harmonyI go to.
She is asleep:
good wench, let's sit downquiet,
For fear we wake her:softly, gentle Patience.
Spirits of peace, whereare ye?
are ye all gone,
And leave me here inwretchedness behind ye?
Madam, we are here.
It is not you I call for:
Saw ye none enter since Islept?
None, madam.
No? Saw you not, even now,
a blessed troop invite meto a banquet;
whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams uponme, like the sun?
They promised me eternalhappiness;
And brought me garlands,Griffith,
which I feel I am notworthy yet to wear:
I shall, assuredly.
I am most joyful, madam,such good dreams
Possess your fancy.
Bid the music leave,
They are harsh and heavyto me.
Do you note
How much her grace isalter'd on the sudden?
How long her face isdrawn? how pale she looks,
And of an earthy cold?Mark her eyes!
She is going, wench: pray,pray.
Heaven comfort her!
An't like your grace,
You are a saucy fellow:
Deserve we no morereverence?
You are to blame,
Knowing she will not loseher wonted greatness,
To use so rude behavior;go to, kneel.
I humbly do entreat yourhighness' pardon;
My haste made meunmannerly.
There is staying agentleman,
sent from the king, to seeyou.
Admit him entrance,Griffith:
but this fellow let mene'er see again.
If my sight fail not,
You should be lordambassador
from the emperor, my royalnephew,
and your name Capucius.
Madam, the same; yourservant.
O, my lord,
The times and titles now
are alter'd strangely withme
since first you knew me.
But, I pray you,
What is your pleasure withme?
Noble lady,
First mine own service toyour grace;
the next, the king'srequest
that I would visit you;
Who grieves much for yourweakness,
and by me sends you hisprincely commendations,
And heartily entreats youtake good comfort.
O my good lord, thatcomfort comes too late;
'Tis like a pardon afterexecution:
That gentle physic, givenin time, had cured me;
But now I am past ancomforts here, but prayers.
How does his highness?
Madam, in good health.
So may he ever do! andever flourish,
When I shal l dwell withworms,
and my poor name banish'dthe kingdom!
Patience, is that letter,I caused you write
yet sent away?
No, madam.
Sir, I most humbly prayyou to deliver
This to my lord the king.
Most willing, madam.
In which I have commendedto his goodness
The model of our chasteloves,
his young daughter;
The dews of heaven fallthick
in blessings on her!
Beseeching him to give hervirtuous breeding
She is young, and of anoble modest nature,
I hope she will deservewell,
and a little to love herfor her mother's sake,
that loved him, heavenknows how dearly.
My next poor petition is,
that his noble grace wouldhave some pity
Upon my wretched women,
that so long have follow'dboth my fortunes faithfully:
Of which there is not one,I dare avow,
And now I should not lie,
but will deserve forvirtue
and true beauty of thesoul,
For honesty and decentcarriage,
A right good husband,
let him be a noble
and, sure, those men arehappy that shall have 'em.
The last is, for my men;
they are the poorest,
But poverty could neverdraw 'em from me;
That they may have theirwages duly paid 'em,
And something over toremember me by:
If heaven had pleased tohave given me longer life
And able means, we had notparted thus.
These are the wholecontents: and, good my lord,
By that you love thedearest in this world,
As you wish Christianpeace to souls departed,
Stand these poor people'sfriend,
and urge the king to do methis last right.
By heaven, I will,
Or let me lose the fashionof a man!
I thank you, honest lord.
Remember me in all humilityunto his highness:
Say his long trouble
now is passing out of thisworld;
tell him, in death Ibless'd him,
For so I will. Mine eyesgrow dim.
Farewell, my lord.
Griffith, farewell.
Nay, Patience,
You must not leave me yet:I must to bed;
Call in more women.
When I am dead, goodwench,
Let me be used withhonour:
strew me over with maidenflowers,
that all the world mayknow I was a chaste wife
to my grave:
embalm me, then lay meforth:
although unqueen'd,
yet like a queen, anddaughter to a king, inter me.
I can no more.
It's one o'clock, boy,is't not?
It hath struck.
These should be hours fornecessities,
Not for delights;
times to repair our naturewith comforting repose,
and not for us to wastethese times.
Good hour of night, SirThomas!
Whither so late?
Came you from the king, mylord
I did, Sir Thomas: andleft him at primero
With the Duke of Suffolk.
I must to him too, beforehe go to bed.
I'll take my leave.
Not yet, Sir ThomasLovell.
What's the matter? Itseems you are in haste:
an if there be no greatoffence belongs to't,
give your friend some touchof your late business:
affairs, that walk, asthey say spirits do,
at midnight, have in thema wilder nature
than the business thatseeks dispatch by day.
My lord, I love you;
And durst commend a secretto your ear
Much weightier than thiswork.
The queen's in labour,
They say, in greatextremity;
and fear'd she'll with thelabour end.
The fruit she goes with Ipray for heartily,
that it may find goodtime, and live:
but for the stock, SirThomas,
I wish it grubb'd up now.
Methinks I could cry theamen; and yet
my conscience says she's agood creature,
and, sweet lady,
does deserve our betterwishes.
But, sir, sir,
Hear me, Sir Thomas:
you're a gentleman of mineown way;
I know you wise,religious;
And, let me tell you,
it will ne'er be well,
'Twill not, Sir ThomasLovell, take't of me,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell,her two hands, and she,
Sleep in their graves.
Now, sir, you speak oftwo
the most remark'd i' thekingdom.
As for Cromwell, besidethat of the jewel house,
is made master o' therolls,
and the king's secretary;further, sir,
Stands in the gap andtrade of moe preferments,
With which the time willload him.
The archbishop is theking's hand and tongue;
and who dare speak onesyllable against him?
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas;
There are that dare;
and I myself have venturedto speak my mind of him:
and indeed this day, Sir,I may tell it you,
I think I have incensedthe lords o' the council,
that he is, For so I knowhe is, they know he is,
A most arch heretic,
a pestilence that doesinfect the land:
with which they moved havebroken with the king;
who hath so far given earto our complaint,
of his great grace andprincely care
foreseeing those fellmischiefs
Our reasons laid beforehim,
hath commanded to-morrowmorning
to the council-board he beconvented.
He's a rank weed, SirThomas,
And we must root him out.
From your affairs I hinderyou too long:
good night, Sir Thomas.
Many good nights, my lord:I rest your servant.
Charles, I will play nomore tonight;
My mind's not on't; youare too hard for me.
Sir, I did never win ofyou before.
But little, Charles; norshall not,
when my fancy's on myplay.
Now, Lovell, from thequeen what is the news?
I could not personallydeliver to her
What you commanded me,
but by her woman I sentyour message;
who return'd her thanks inthe great'st humbleness,
and desired your highness mostheartily to pray for her.
What say'st thou, ha?
To pray for her? what, isshe crying out?
So said her woman
and that her sufferancemade
Almost each pang a death.
Alas, good lady!
God safely quit her of herburthen,
and with gentle travail,
to the gladding of yourhighness with an heir!
'Tis midnight, Charles;
Prithee, to bed; and inthy prayers
remember the estate of mypoor queen.
Leave me alone;
For I must think of thatwhich company
Would not be friendly to.
I wish your highness aquiet night;
and my good mistress willremember in my prayers.
Charles, good night.
Well, sir, what follows?
Sir, I have brought mylord the archbishop,
As you commanded me.
Ha! Canterbury?
Ay, my good lord.
'Tis true: where is he,Guilford?
He attends your highness'pleasure.
Bring him to us. Avoid thegallery.
Ha! I have said. Be gone.What!
How now, my lord! youdesire to know
Wherefore I sent for you.
It is my duty to attendyour highness' pleasure.
Pray you, arise,
My good and gracious Lordof Canterbury.
Come, you and I must walka turn together;
I have news to tell you:
come, come, give me yourhand.
Ah, my good lord, I grieveat what I speak,
And am right sorry torepeat what follows
I have, and mostunwillingly,
of late heard many grievous,I do say, my lord,
Grievous complaints ofyou;
which, being consider'd,
Have moved us and ourcouncil,
that you shall thismorning come before us;
where, I know,
You cannot with suchfreedom purge yourself,
But that, till furthertrial in those charges
Which will require youranswer,
you must take yourpatience to you,
and be well contented tomake your house our Tower:
you a brother of us,
It fits we thus proceed,
or else no witness wouldcome against you.
I humbly thank yourhighness;
And am right glad to catchthis good occasion
Most throughly to bewinnow'd,
where my chaff and cornshall fly asunder:
for, I know,
there's none stands undermore calumnious tongues
Than I myself, poor man.
Stand up, good Canterbury:
Thy truth and thyintegrity
is rooted in us, thyfriend:
give me thy hand, standup:
Prithee, let's walk.
Now, by my holidame. Whatmanner of man are you?
My lord, I look'd youwould have
given me your petition,
that I should have ta'ensome pains
to bring together yourselfand your accusers;
and to have heard you,
Without indurance,further.
Most dread liege,
The good I stand on is mytruth and honesty:
If they shall fail, I,with mine enemies,
Will triumph o'er myperson;
which I weigh not, beingof those virtues vacant.
I fear nothing what can besaid against me.
Know you not how yourstate stands i' the world,
with the whole world?
Your enemies are many, andnot small;
their practises must bearthe same proportion;
and not ever the justice andthe truth o' the question
carries the due o' theverdict with it:
at what ease might corruptminds
procure knaves as corrupt
To swear against you? suchthings have been done.
You are potently opposed;
and with a malice of asgreat size.
Ween you of better luck,
I mean, in perjuredwitness, than your master,
Whose minister you are,
whiles here he lived uponthis naughty earth?
Go to, go to;
You take a precipice forno leap of danger,
And woo your owndestruction.
God and your majestyprotect mine innocence,
or I fall into the trap islaid for me!
Be of good cheer;
They shall no more prevailthan we give way to.
Keep comfort to you;
and this morning see youdo appear before them:
if they shall chance, incharging you with matters,
to commit you,
The best persuasions to thecontrary fail not to use,
and with what vehemency
the occasion shallinstruct you:
if entreaties will renderyou no remedy,
this ring deliver them,
and your appeal to usthere make before them.
Look, the good man weeps!
He's honest, on minehonour.
God's blest mother!
I swear he istrue--hearted;
and a soul none better inmy kingdom.
Get you gone, and do as Ihave bid you.
He has strangled hislanguage in his tears.
Come back: what mean you?
I'll not come back;
the tidings that I bring willmake my boldness manners.
Now, good angels fly o'erthy royal head,
and shade thy person undertheir blessed wings!
Now, by thy looks I guessthy message.
Is the queen deliver'd?
Say, ay; and of a boy.
Ay, ay, my liege; and of alovely boy:
the God of heaven both nowand ever bless her!
'tis a girl, promises boyshereafter.
Sir, your queen desiresyour visitation,
and to be acquainted withthis stranger
'tis as like you as cherryis to cherry.
Lovell!
Sir?
Give her an hundred marks.I'll to the queen.
An hundred marks! By thislight, I'll ha' more.
An ordinary groom is forsuch payment.
I will have more, or scoldit out of him.
Said I for this, the girlwas like to him?
I will have more, or elseunsay't;
and now, while it is hot,I'll put it to the issue.
I hope I am not too late;
and yet the gentleman,
that was sent to me fromthe council,
pray'd me to make greathaste.
All fast? what means this?
Ho! Who waits there?
Sure, you know me?
Yes, my lord; But yet Icannot help you.
Why?
Your grace must wait tillyou be call'd for.
So.
This is a piece of malice.
I am glad I came this wayso happily:
the king shall understandit presently.
'Tis Butts, the king'sphysician:
as he pass'd along,
How earnestly he cast hiseyes upon me!
Pray heaven, he sound notmy disgrace!
For certain, this is ofpurpose
laid by some that hate meGod turn their hearts!
I never sought theirmalice
To quench mine honour:
they would shame to makeme wait else at door,
a fellow-counsellor,
'Mong boys, grooms, andlackeys.
But their pleasures mustbe fulfill'd,
and I attend withpatience.
I'll show your grace thestrangest sight
What's that, Butts?
I think your highness sawthis many a day.
Body o' me, where is it?
There, my lord:
The high promotion of hisgrace of Canterbury;
Who holds his state atdoor, 'mongst pursuivants,
Pages, and footboys.
Ha! 'tis he, indeed:
Is this the honour they doone another?
'Tis well there's oneabove 'em yet.
I had thought they hadparted
so much honesty among 'em
At least, good manners,
as not thus to suffer aman of his place,
and so near our favour,
To dance attendance ontheir lordships' pleasures,
And at the door too, likea post with packets.
By holy Mary, Butts,there's knavery:
Speak to the business,master-secretary:
Why are we met in council?
Please your honours,
The chief cause concernshis grace of Canterbury.
Has he had knowledge ofit?
Yes.
Who waits there?
Without, my noble lords?
Yes.
My lord archbishop;
And has done half an hour,to know your pleasures.
Let him come in.
Your grace may enter now.
My good lord archbishop,
I'm very sorry to sit hereat this present,
and behold that chairstand empty:
but we all are men,
In our own natures frail,
and capable of our flesh;few are angels:
out of which frailty andwant of wisdom,
you, that best shouldteach us,
Have misdemean'd yourself,and not a little,
Toward the king first,then his laws,
in filling the wholerealm, by your teaching
and your chaplains,
For so we are inform'd,with new opinions,
Divers and dangerous;which are heresies,
And, not reform'd, mayprove pernicious.
Which reformation
must be sudden too, mynoble lords;
for those that tame wildhorses
Pace 'em not in theirhands to make 'em gentle,
But stop their mouths withstubborn bits, and spur 'em,
Till they obey the manage.
If we suffer,
Out of our easiness andchildish pity
To one man's honour, thiscontagious sickness,
Farewell all physic:
and what follows then?
Commotions, uproars,
with a general taint ofthe whole state:
as, of late days, ourneighbours,
The upper Germany, candearly witness,
Yet freshly pitied in ourmemories.
My good lords,
hitherto, in all theprogress
Both of my life andoffice,
I have labour'd,
And with no little study,
that my teaching and thestrong course
of my authority might goone way,
and safely; and the endwas ever, to do well:
nor is there living,
I speak it with a singleheart, my lords,
A man that more detests,more stirs against,
Both in his privateconscience and his place,
Defacers of a publicpeace, than I do.
Pray heaven, the king maynever find a heart
With less allegiance init!
Men that make envy andcrooked malice nourishment
Dare bite the best.
I do beseech yourlordships,
That, in this case ofjustice,
my accusers, be what theywill,
may stand forth face toface,
And freely urge againstme.
Nay, my lord, that cannotbe:
you are a counsellor,
And, by that virtue, noman dare accuse you.
My lord, because we havebusiness of more moment,
We will be short with you.
'Tis his highness'pleasure,
And our consent, forbetter trial of you,
From hence you becommitted to the Tower;
Where, being but a privateman again,
You shall know many dareaccuse you boldly,
More than, I fear, you areprovided for.
Ah, my good Lord ofWinchester, I thank you;
You are always my goodfriend;
if your will pass,
I shall both find yourlordship judge and juror,
You are so merciful:
I see your end;
'Tis my undoing:
love and meekness, lord,
Become a churchman betterthan ambition:
Win straying souls withmodesty again,
Cast none away.
That I shall clear myself,
Lay all the weight ye canupon my patience,
I make as little doubt,
as you do conscienceindoing daily wrongs.
I could say more,
But reverence to yourcalling makes me modest.
My lord, my lord, you area sectary,
That's the plain truth:
your painted glossdiscovers,
To men that understandyou, words and weakness.
My Lord of Winchester, youare a little,
By your good favour, toosharp;
men so noble, howeverfaulty,
yet should find respect
For what they have been:
'tis a cruelty to load afalling man.
Good master secretary,
I cry your honour mercy;
you may, worst of all thistable, say so.
Why, my lord?
Do not I know you for afavourer
Of this new sect?
ye are not sound.
Not sound?
Not sound, I say.
Would you were half sohonest!
Men's prayers then wouldseek you, not their fears.
I shall remember this boldlanguage.
Do. Remember your boldlife too.
This is too much;
Forbear, for shame, mylords.
I have done.
And I.
Then thus for you, mylord:
it stands agreed, I takeit, by all voices,
that forthwith you beconvey'd to the Tower
a prisoner;
There to remain till theking's further pleasure
Be known unto us:
are you all agreed, lords?
We are.
Is there no other way ofmercy,
But I must needs to theTower, my lords?
What other would youexpect?
you are strangelytroublesome.
Let some o' the guard beready there.
For me? Must I go like atraitor thither?
Receive him, and see himsafe i' the Tower.
Stay,
good my lords, I have alittle yet to say.
Look there, my lords;
By virtue of that ring,
I take my cause out of thegripes of cruel men,
and give it to a mostnoble judge,
the king my master.
This is the king's ring.
'Tis no counterfeit.
'Tis the right ring,
by heaven: I told ye all,
When ye first put thisdangerous stone a-rolling,
'Twould fall uponourselves.
Do you think, my lords,
The king will suffer
but the little finger ofthis man to be vex'd?
'Tis now too certain:
How much more is his lifein value with him?
Would I were fairly outon't!
My mind gave me, inseeking tales
and informations againstthis man,
whose honesty the deviland his disciples
only envy at,
Ye blew the fire thatburns ye:
now have at ye!
Dread sovereign,
how much are we bound toheaven
In daily thanks, that gaveus such a prince;
Not only good and wise,but most religious:
One that, in all obedience,makes the church
The chief aim of hishonour;
and, to strengthen thatholy duty,
out of dear respect, hisroyal self in judgment
comes to hear the cause
betwixt her and this greatoffender.
You were ever good atsudden commendations,
Bishop of Winchester.
But know,
I come not to hear suchflattery now,
and in my presence;
They are too thin and bareto hide offences.
To me you cannot reach,you play the spaniel,
And think with wagging ofyour tongue to win me;
But, whatsoe'er thoutakest me for,
I'm sure thou hast a cruelnature and a bloody.
Good man, sit down.
Now let me see the proudesthe, that dares most,
but wag his finger atthee:
By all that's holy,
he had better starve
Than but once think thisplace becomes thee not.
May it please your grace,
No, sir, it does notplease me.
I had thought I had hadmen
of some understanding andwisdom of my council;
but I find none.
Was it discretion, lords,to let this man,
This good man,--few of youdeserve that title,--
This honest man,
wait like a lousy footboyAt chamberdoor?
and one as great as youare?
Why, what a shame wasthis!
Did my commission bid yeso far forget yourselves?
I gave ye power as he wasa counsellor to try him,
Not as a groom:
there's some of ye, I see,
More out of malice thanintegrity,
Would try him to theutmost, had ye mean;
Which ye shall never havewhile I live.
Thus far, my most dreadsovereign,
may it like your grace tolet my tongue excuse all.
What was purposed concerninghis imprisonment,
was rather, if there befaith in men,
meant for his trial, andfair purgation to the world,
than malice, I'm sure, inme.
Well, well, my lords,respect him;
Take him, and use himwell, he's worthy of it.
I will say thus much forhim,
if a prince may bebeholding to a subject,
I am, for his love andservice, so to him.
Make me no more ado, butall embrace him:
Be friends, for shame, mylords!
My Lord of Canterbury,
I have a suit which youmust not deny me;
That is, a fair young maid
that yet wants baptism,
You must be godfather, andanswer for her.
The greatest monarch nowalive may glory
In such an honour:
how may I deserve it
That am a poor and humblesubject to you?
Come, come, my lord,you'ld spare your spoons:
you shall have two noblepartners with you;
the old Duchess of Norfolk,and Lady Marquess Dorset:
will these please you?
Once more, my Lord ofWinchester, I charge you,
Embrace and love this man.
With a true heart
And brother-love I do it.
And let heaven witness,
how dear I hold thisconfirmation.
Good man, those joyfultears show thy true heart:
The common voice, I see,
is verified of thee, whichsays thus,
'Do my Lord of Canterburya shrewd turn,
and he is your friend forever.'
Come, lords, we trifletime away;
I long to have this youngone made a Christian.
As I have made ye one,lords, one remain;
So I grow stronger, youmore honour gain.
Heaven, from thy endlessgoodness,
send prosperous life,long, and ever happy,
to the high and mightyprincess of England,
Elizabeth!
And to your royal grace,and the good queen,
My noble partners, andmyself, thus pray:
All comfort, joy, in thismost gracious lady,
Heaven ever laid up tomake parents happy,
May hourly fall upon ye!
Thank you, good lordarchbishop:
What is her name?
Elizabeth.
Stand up, lord.
With this kiss take myblessing:
God protect thee! Intowhose hand I give thy life.
Amen.
My noble gossips, ye havebeen too prodigal:
I thank ye heartily; soshall this lady,
When she has so muchEnglish.
Let me speak, sir,
For heaven now bids me;
and the words I utter letnone think flattery,
for they'll find 'emtruth.
This royal infant--heavenstill move about her!--
Though in her cradle,
yet now promises upon thisland
a thousand thousandblessings,
Which time shall bring toripeness:
she shall be--
but few now living canbehold that goodness--
A pattern to all princesliving with her,
And all that shallsucceed:
Saba was never morecovetous of wisdom
and fair virtue
Than this pure soulshall be:
all princely graces,
That mould up such amighty piece as this is,
With all the virtues thatattend the good,
Shall still be doubled onher:
truth shall nurse her,
Holy and heavenly thoughtsstill counsel her:
She shall be loved andfear'd:
her own shall bless her;
Her foes shake like afield of beaten corn,
And hang their heads withsorrow:
good grows with her:
In her days every manshall eat in safety,
Under his own vine, whathe plants;
and sing the merry songs ofpeace to all his neighbours:
God shall be truly known;
and those about her
from her shall read theperfect ways of honour,
And by those claim theirgreatness,
not by blood.
Nor shall this peace sleepwith her:
but as when the bird ofwonder dies,
the maiden phoenix,
Her ashes new createanother heir,
As great in admiration asherself;
So shall she leave herblessedness to one,
When heaven shall call her
from this cloud ofdarkness,
Who from the sacred ashesof her honour
Shall star-like rise, asgreat in fame as she was,
And so stand fix'd:
peace, plenty, love,truth, terror,
That were the servants tothis chosen infant,
Shall then be his, andlike a vine grow to him:
Wherever the bright sun ofheaven shall shine,
His honour and thegreatness of his name
Shall be, and make newnations:
he shall flourish,
And, like a mountaincedar,
reach his branches to allthe plains about him:
our children's childrenshall see this,
and bless heaven.
Thou speakest wonders.
She shall be, to thehappiness of England,
An aged princess;
many days shall see her,
And yet no day without adeed to crown it.
Would I had known nomore!
but she must die,
She must, the saints musthave her; yet a virgin,
A most unspotted lilyshall she pass
To the ground,
and all the world shallmourn her.
O lord archbishop,
Thou hast made me now aman!
never, before this happychild, did I get any thing:
This oracle of comfort hasso pleased me,
That when I am in heaven
I shall desire to see whatthis child does,
and praise my Maker.
I thank ye all.
To you, my good lordmayor,
And your good brethren,
I am much beholding;
I have received muchhonour by your presence,
And ye shall find methankful.
Lead the way, lords:
Ye must all see the queen,and she must thank ye,
She will be sick else.
This day, no man think hasbusiness at his house;
for all shall stay:
This little one shall makeit holiday.